.R3?  $7£ 


EJtux#<$  Go-y^  fcoufve- 


LIBRARY  OF  CONGRESS 


0  006  745  266  5  £ 


Conservation  Resources 
Lig-Free®  Type  I 

Ph  ft  C  RiifforMl 


E  59 

■  R38 
B76 
Copy  i 

COLUMBUS, 
RAMON  PANE  AND  THE 
BEGINNINGS  OF 

AMERICAN 
ANTHROPOLOGY 

By 

EDWAKD  GATLOKD  BOUKNE 
Professor  of  History  in  Yale  University 


Reprinted  from  the  Proceedings  of  the 
American  Antiquarian  Society 


WORCESTER 

1906 


Hi  EXCHAKffi 


jul  is  m 


3 


COLUMBUS,  RAMON   PANE   AND  THE 
BEGINNINGS  OF  AMERICAN 
ANTHROPOLOGY. 

BY  EDWARD  GAYLORD  BOURNE. 

About  three  weeks  hence  on  May  20th  will  be  celebrated 
the  400th  anniversary  of  the  death  of  Columbus.  Appar- 
ently little  notice  will  be  taken  of  this  anniversary  in  the 
United  States.  To  the  American  people  at  large  the  event 
of  supreme  interest  in  the  career  of  the  Admiral  is,  of  course, 
the  discovery  of  the  New  World,  and  the  quadricentenary 
of  that  was  celebrated  with  an  elaboration  which  naturally 
precludes  any  considerable  expenditure  of  effort  and  enthu- 
siasm within  the  same  generation  in  commemoration  of  the 
death  of  the  discoverer.  Yet  this  anniversary  should  not 
pass  unnoticed,  least  of  all  by  a  learned  society  devoted  to 
the  study  of  American  antiquities,  for  Christopher  Columbus 
not  only  revealed  the  field  of  our  studies  to  the  world  but 
actually  in  person  set  on  foot  the  first  systematic  study  of 
American  primitive  custom,  religion  and  folklore  ever  under- 
taken. He  is  in  a  sense  therefore  the  founder  of  American 
Anthropology.  This  phase  of  the  varied  activities  of  the 
discoverer  has  received  in  our  day  little  or  no  attention. 
To  all  appearances  it  is  not  even  mentioned  in  Justin  Winsor's 
six  hundred  page  biography.  Such  neglect  is  owing  in  part 
to  the  discredit  that  has  been  cast  upon  the  life  of  Columbus 
by  his  son  Ferdinand  in  consequence  of  which  its  contents 
have  not  been  studied  with  due  critical  appreciation. 

In  Ferdinand's  biography  of  his  father,  commonly  referred 
to  under  the  first  word  of  the  Italian  title  as  the  Historie, 
are  imbedded  not  a  few  fragments  of  Columbus'  own  letters 


4 


and  other  documents  not  commonly  reproduced  in  the  selec- 
tions from  his  writings.  To  two  such  documents  as  present- 
ing the  evidence  of  Columbus'  interest  and  efforts  in  the 
field  of  American  Anthropology  I  invite  your  attention 
this  morning. 

The  first  contains  the  discoverer's  own  brief  summary  of 
what  he  was  able  to  learn  of  the  beliefs  of  the  natives  of 
Espanola  during  the  period  of  his  second  voyage,  1493 — 96, 
and  the  record  of  his  commissioning  the  Friar  Ramon  Pane 
who  had  learned  the  language  of  the  islanders,  "  to  collect  all 
their  ceremonies  and  antiquities."  The  second  is  Ramon's 
report  of  his  observations  and  inquiries  and  is  not  only  the 
first  treatise  ever  written  in  the  field  of  American  Antiqui- 
ties, but  to  this  day  remains  our  most  authentic  record  of 
the  religion  and  folk-lore  of  the  long  since  extinct  Tainos, 
the  aboriginal  inhabitants  of  Hayti. 

The  original  Spanish  text  of  these  documents  is  no 
longer  extant  and,  like  the  Historie  which  contains  them,  they 
are  known  to  us  in  full  only  in  the  Italian  translation  of 
that  work  published  in  Venice  in  1571  by  Alfonso  Ulloa. 

The  observations  of  Columbus  first  referred  to  were 
recorded  in  his  narrative  of  his  second  voyage  which  we 
possess  only  in  the  abridgments  of  Las  Casas  and  Ferdinand 
Columbus.  Both  of  these  authors  in  condensing  the  original, 
incorporated  passages  in  the  exact  words  of  the  Admiral, 
and  it  is  from  such  a  passage  in  Ferdinand's  abridgment 
that  we  derive  the  Admiral's  account  of  the  religion  of 
primitive  Hayti.  Ferdinand  writes:  "Our  people  also 
learned  many  other  things  which  seem  to  me  worthy  to  be 
related  in  this  our  history.  Beginning  then  with  religion  I 
will  record  here  the  very  words  of  the  Admiral  who  wrote 
as  follows:" 

"I  was  able  to  discover  neither  idolatry  nor  any  other  sect  among 
them,  although  all  their  kings,  who  are  many,  not  only  in  Espanola  but 
also  in  all  the  other  islands  and  on  the  main  land*  each  have  a  house 
apart  from  the  village,  in  which  there  is  nothing  except  some  wooden 

*I.  e.  Cuba,  which  Columbus  believed  to  be  the  main  land. 


5 


images  carved  in  relief  which  are  called  cemis*  nor  is  there  anything 
done  in  such  a  house  for  any  other  object  or  service  except  for  these 
cemis,  by  means  of  a  kind  of  ceremony  and  prayer  which  they  go  to 
make  in  it  as  we  go  to  churches.  In  this  house  they  have  a  finely  wrought 
table,  round  like  a  wooden  dish  in  which  is  some  powder  which  is  placed 
by  them  on  the  heads  of  these  cemis  in  performing  a  certain  ceremony; 
then  with  a  cane  that  has  two  branches  which  they  place  in  their  nos- 
trils they  snuff  up  this  dust.  The  words  that  they  say  none  of  our  people 
understand.  With  this  powder  they  lose  consciousness  and  become 
like  drunken  men. 

They  give  a  name  to  this  figure,  and  I  believe  it  is  that  of  a  father, 
grandfather  or  of  both,  since  they  have  more  than  one  such,  and  some 
more  than  ten,  all  in  memory,  as  I  have  said,  of  some  one  of  their  ances- 
tors. I  have  heard  them  praise  one  more  than  another,  and  have  seen 
them  show  it  more  devotion  and  do  more  reverence  to  one  than  another 
as  we  do  in  processions  where  there  is  need. 

Both  the  Caciques  and  the  peoples  boast  to  each  other  of  having 
the  best  cemis.  When  they  go  to  these  cemis  of  theirs  and  enter  the  house 
where  he  is  they  are  on  their  guard  with  respect  to  the  Christians  and 
do  not  suffer  them  to  enter  it.  On  the  contrary,  if  they  suspect  they 
are  coming,  they  take  the  cemi  or  the  cemis  away  and  hide  them  in  the 
woods  for  fear  they  may  be  taken  from  them;  and  what  is  more  laugh- 
able they  have  the  custom  of  stealing  each  other's  cemis.  It  happened 
once,  when  they  suspected  us,  that  the  Christians  entered  the  said 
house  with  them  and  of  a  sudden  the  cemi  gave  a  loud  cry  and  spoke 
in  their  language  from  which  it  was  discovered  that  it  was  artfully  con- 
structed because  being  hollow,  they  had  fitted  to  the  lower  part  a  trum- 
pet or  tube  which  extended  to  a  dark  part  of  the  house  covered  'with 
leaves  and  branches  where  there  was  a  person  who  spoke  what  the 
Cacique  wanted  him  to  say  so  far  as  it  could  be  done  with  a  tube.  Where- 
upon our  men  having  suspected  what  might  be  the  case,  kicked  the 
cemi  over  and  found  the  facts  as  I  have  just  described.  When  the 
Cacique  saw  that  it  was  discovered  by  our  men  he  besought  them  urg- 
ently not  to  say  anything  to  the  Indians,  his  subjects,  nor  to  others 
because  by  this  deceit  he  kept  them  in  obedience. 

This  then  we  can  say,  there  is  some  semblance  of  idolatry,  at  least 
among  those  who  do  not  know  the  secret  and  the  deception  of  their 
Caciques  because  they  believe  that  the  one  who  speaks  is  the  cemi.  In 
general  all  the  people  are  deceived  and  the  Cacique  alone  is  the  one 
who  is  conscious  of  and  promotes  their  false  belief  by  means  of  which 
he  draws  from  his  people  all  those  tributes  as  seems  good  to  him.  Like- 
wise most  of  the  Caciques  have  three  stones  to  which  they  and  their 

*Ulloa  in  his  Italian  gives  this  word  in  various  forms  e.  g.  cemi,  cimi,  cimini  and 
cimiche.  The  correct  form  is  cemi  with  the  accent  on  the  last  syllable.  Las  Casas 
says,  "Estas — llamaban  cemi,  la  ultima  silaba  luenga  y  aguda."  Docs.  Ineditos  para 
la  Historia  de  Espana,  LXVI,  436.  J.  Walter  Fewkes  published  an 

article  with  illustrations  "On  Zemes  from  Santo  Domingo"  in  the  American  Anthro- 
polgist,  IV,  167-175. 


6 


peoples  pay  great  reverence.  One  they  say  helps  the  corn  and  the  vege- 
tables that  are  planted;  another  the  child-bearing  of  women  without 
pain;  and  the  third  helps  by  means  of  water  (i.  e.  rain)  and  the  sun 
when  they  have  need  of  it.  I  sent  three  of  these  stones  to  your  Highness 
by  Antonio  de  Torres*  and  another  set  of  three  I  have  to  bring  with  me. 

When  these  Indians  die  they  have  the  funerals  in  different  ways. 
The  way  the  Caciques  are  buried,  is  as  follows.  They  open  the  Cacique 
and  dry  him  by  the  fire  in  order  that  he  may  be  preserved  whole,  (or, 
entirely).  Of  others  they  take  only  the  head.  Others  are  buried  in 
a  cave  and  they  place  above  their  head  a  gourd  of  water  and  some  bread. 
Others  they  burn  in  the  house  where  they  die  and  when  they  see  them 
on  the  point  of  death  they  do  not  let  them  finish  their  life  but  strangle 
them.  This  is  done  to  the  Caciques.  Others  they  drive  out  of  the  house; 
and  others  they  put  into  a  hamaca,  which  is  their  bed  of  netting,  and 
put  water  and  bread  at  their  head  and  leave  them  alone  without  return- 
ing to  see  them  any  more.  Some  again  that  are  seriously  ill  they  take 
to  the  Cacique  and  he  tells  them  whether  they  ought  to  be  strangled  or 
not  and  they  do  what  he  commands. 

I  have  taken  pains  to  learn  what  they  believe  and  if  they  know  where 
they  go  after  death;  especially  from  Caunabo,  who  is  the  chief  king 
in  Espanola,  a  man  of  years,  of  great  knowledge  and  very  keen  mind; 
and  he  and  others  replied  that  they  go  to  a  certain  valley  which  every 
principal  Cacique  believes  is  situated  in  his  own  country,  affirming 
that  there  they  find  their  father  and  all  their  ancestors;  and  that  they 
eat  and  have  women  and  give  themselves  to  pleasures  and  recreation 
as  is  more  fully  contained  in  the  following  account  in  which  I  ordered 
one  Friar  Roman  (Ramon)  who  knew  their  language  to  collect  all  their 
ceremonies  and  their  antiquities  although  so  much  of  it  is  fable  that 
one  cannot  extract  anything  fruitful  from  it  beyond  the  fact  that  each 
one  of  them  has  a  certain  natural  regard  for  the  future  and  believes  in 
the  immortality  of  our  souls,  "f 

Then  follows  in  Ferdinand's  biography  a  transcript  of 
this  "Account  by  Friar  Roman  (Ramon)  of  the  Antiquities 
of  the  Indians  which  he  as  one  who  knows  their  language 
diligently  collected  by  command  of  the  Admiral."  Before 
describing  Friar  Ramon's  work  I  will  present  what  little 
information  in  regard  to  him  that  I  have  been  able  to  find. 

The  historian  Las  Casas  knew  Ramon  Pane  and  tells 
us  in  his  Apologetica  Historia  that  he  came  to  Espanola  at 
the  beginning  with  the  Admiral  J  which  must  mean  on  the 

♦Antonio  de  Torres  set  forth  on  the  return  voyage  here  referred  to  February  2, 1494. 
tHistorie.    Ed.  1571,  folios  125-126. 

JLas  Casas.  Apologetica  Historia.  Docs.  Ine"d.  para  la  Hist,  de  Espana,  LXVI 
435-36. 


7 


second  voyage  in  1493  as  there  were  no  clergy  on  the  first 
voyage.  Later  he  says  he  came  five  years  before  he  him- 
self did  which  would  be  in  1497  *  This  second  statement  is 
erroneous  for  Columbus,  as  has  just  been  seen,  reports  the 
result  of  his  labors  in  his  own  account  of  his  second  voyage 
which  he  drew  up  in  1496.  Las  Casas  also  says  that  Ramon 
was  a  Catalan  by  birth  and  did  not  speak  Castilian  perfectly 
and  that  he  was  a  simple-minded  man  so  that  what  he  j 
reported  was  sometimes  confused  and  of  little  substance. t 
The  Admiral  sent  him  first  into  the  province  of  lower  Maco- 
rix' whose  language  he  knew  and  then  later,  because  this 
language  was  spoken  only  in  a  small  territory,  to  the  Vega 
and  the  region  where  King  Guarionex  bore  sway  where  he 
could  accomplish  much  more  because  the  population  was 
greater  and  the  language  diffused  throughout  the  island. 
He  remained  there  two  years  and  did  what  he  could  accord- 
ing to  his  slender  abilities.! 

To  Peter  Martyr  who  read  and  abstracted  his  treatise, 
he  is  merely  "One  Ramon  a  hermit  whom  Colon  had  left 
with  certain  kings  of  the  island  to  instruct  them  in  the 
Christian  faith.  And  tarrying  there  a  long  time  he  com- 
posed a  small  book  in  the  Spanish  tongue  on  the  rites  of 
the  islands."  § 

These  few  references  are  all  the  contemporary  information 
to  be  derived  about  Ramon  Pane  outside  of  his  own  narrative. 
This  little  work  which  I  have  called  the  pioneer  treatise  in 
American  Antiquities  has  come  down  to  us  as  a  whole,  as 
I  have  said,  only  in  the  Italian  translation  of  Ferdinand 
Columbus's  life  of  the  Admiral.  By  one  of  the  mishaps  of 
fate  the  translator  transformed  the  author's  name  from 
Ramon  Pane  into  Roman  Pane,  and  under  that  disguise  he 
appears  in  most  modern  works  in  which  he  appears  at  all. 
But  the  testimony  of  Las  Casas  who  knew  him  and  of  Peter 

*Las  Casas  op.  cit.  473. 
fLas  Casas,  op.  cit.  475. 
Jlbid.  436. 

§Peter  Martyr.    De  Rebus  Oceanicis.  ed.  1574,  p.  102.  :  - 


8 


Martyr  who  used  his  work  in  Spanish  is  conclusive  that  his 
name  was  Ramon.  Ramon,  too,  is  a  common  Catalan 
name.  Such  few  writers  on  early  American  religion  and 
folk-lore  as  use  his  work  directly  resort  either  to  the  Italian 
text  or  some  of  the  translations  or  to  Peter  Martyr's  epitome 
in  the  9th  book  of  the  first  of  his  decades  of  the  Ocean. 
Few,  if  any,  make  a  critical  comparison  of  these  two  forms 
of  his  work  and  none  so  far  as  I  know  have  supplemented 
such  a  comparison  with  such  of  the  material  in  Las  Casas's 
Apologetica  Historia  as  was  derived  from  Ramon's  work  in 
the  original. 

The  interest  and  importance  of  the  subject  justify  it 
seems  to  me  a  critical  study  of  Friar  Ramon's  work  as  the 
earliest  detailed  account  of  the  legends  and  religious  beliefs 
and  practices  of  the  long  since  extinct  natives  of  Hayti. 
The  range  of  its  contents  is  considerable.  It  contains  a 
cosmogony,  a  creation  legend,  an  Amazon  legend,  a  legend 
which  offers  interesting  evidence  that  syphilis  was  an  indi- 
genous and  ancient  disease  in  America  at  the  time  of  its 
discovery,  a  flood  and  ocean  legend,  a  tobacco  legend,  a 
sun  and  moon  legend,  a  long  account  of  the  Haytian  medicine 
men,  an  account  of  the  making  of  their  cemis  or  fetishes,  of 
the  ritualistic  use  of  tobacco,  a  current  native  prophecy  of 
the  appearance  in  the  island  of  a  race  of  clothed  people 
and  lastly  a  brief  report  of  the  earliest  conversions  to  Chris- 
tianity in  the  island  and  of  the  first  native  martyrs. 

To  facilitate  a  study  of  this  material  in  its  earliest  record 
I  have  translated  Ramon's  treatise  from  the  Italian, 
excerpted  and  collated  with  it  the  epitomes  of  Peter  Martyr 
and  Las  Casas  and  have  prepared  brief  notes,  the  whole 
to  form  so  far  as  may  be  a  critical  working  text  of  this  source 
for  the  folklorist  and  student  of  Comparative  Religion  in 
America.  The  proper  names  in  each  case  are  given  as  in 
the  1571  edition  of  the  Historie.  Later  editions  of  the  Italian 
and  the  English  version  to  be  found  in  Churchill's  Voyages 
(vol.  II.)  and  Pinkerton's  Voyages  (Vol.  XII)  give  divergent 


9 


forms.  At  best  the  spelling  of  these  names  offers  much 
perplexity.  Ramon  wrote  down  in  Spanish  the  sounds  he 
heard,  Ferdinand,  unfamiliar  with  the  sounds,  copied  the 
names  and  then  still  later  Ulloa  equally  unfamiliar  with 
the  originals  copied  them  into  his  Italian.  In  such  a  process 
there  was  inevitably  some  confusion  of  u  and  n  and  of  u 
and  v,  (Spanish  b.)  In  the  Italian  text  v  is  never  used, 
it  is  always  u.  In  not  a  few  cases  the  Latin  of  Peter  Martyr 
and  the  Spanish  of  Las  Casas  give  us  forms  much  nearer 
those  used  by  Ramon  than  the  Italian. 


LIST  OF  MODERN  WORKS  DEALING  DIRECTLY 
WITH  THE  TREATISE  OF  RAMON  PANE  OR 
PARTICULARLY  SERVICEABLE  IN  THE 
STUDY  OF  IT. 

Bachiller  y  Morales,  Antonio.  Cuba  Primitiva:  Origen,  Lenguas, 
Tradiciones  e  Historia  de  los  Indios  de  las  Antillas  Mayores  y  las  Lucayas. 
2nd.  Ed.  Habana,  1883.  The  fullest  study  of  the  subject  with  full 
vocabularies  of  extant  aboriginal  wor4s  and  a  dictionary  of  historical 
names  and  traditions.  Contains  also  a  translation  of  the  part 
of  Ramon  Pane's  treatise  that  relates  to  primitive  religion  and 
folklore. 

Bastian,  Adolf.  Die  Culturlander  des  Alten  America.  2  vols. 
Berlin,  1878.  The  second  vol.  with  the  sub-title,  Beitrage  zu  Geschicht- 
lichen  Vorarbeiten  auf  Westlicher  Hemisphare,  devotes  a  chapter,  pp. 
285-314  to  the  Antilles.  It  consists  of  rough  notes  assembled  from 
Ramon  Pane  and  Peter  Martyr  and  other  writers  relating  to  the  religion 
and  folklore  of  the  aborigines  of  the  Antilles. 

Bloch,  Dr.  Iwan.  Der  Ursprung  der  Syphilis.  Eine  medizinische 
und  Kulturgeschichtiche  Untersuchung.  Erste  Abteilung,  Jena,  1901. 
An  elaborate  critical  and  historical  study  which  definitely  establishes 
the  American  origin  of  Syphilis.  The  evidence  from  Ramon  Pane  is 
discussed  on  pp.  201-204. 

Douay,  Leon.  Affinites  lexicologiques  du  Haitien  et  du  Maya. 
Congres  International  des  Am6ricanistes.  Compte  Rendu  de  la  106me 
session.  Stockholm  1897,  pp.  193-206.  Reproduces  in  parallel  columns 
with  the  corresponding  Maya  words  the  Haytian  vocabulary  compiled 
by  the  Abbe"  Brasseur  de  Bourbourg. 


10 


/  / 

Douay,  Leon.  Etudes  Etymologiques  sur  L'Antiquite"  Am6ricaine. 
Paris,  1891.  Etymological  interpretation  of  proper  names  in  Hayti 
and  the  non-Carib  Antilles,  pp.  26-30. 

Ehrenreich,  Paul.  Die  Mythen  und  Legenden  der  Siidamerikanis- 
chen  Urvolker  und  ihre  Beziehungen  zu  denen  Nordamerikas  und  der 
alten  Welt.  Berlin  1895.  Supplement  zu  Zeitschrift  fur  Ethnologie 
1905.  The  author  of  this  very  valuable  introduction  to  the  comparative 
study  of  American  Mythology  has  used  Ramon  Pane  only  in  Peter 
Martyr's  abstract. 

Gilij,  Filippo  Salv adore.  Saggio  di  Storia  Americana  o  sia  storia 
Natural,  Civile,  e  sacra  de  regni  e  delle  provincie  Spagnuole  di  Terra- 
ferma  nelT  America  Meridionale.  Roma  MDCCLXXXII,  3  Vols.  In 
vol.  3,  pp.  220-228  is  a  vocabulary  of  the  Haytian  language  compiled 
from  Oviedo,  Peter  Martyr  (Ramon  Pane)  Acosta  and  other  writers. 
This  vocabulary  is  sometimes  reproduced  by  later  writers  with  revisions. 

Lollis,  Cesare  de,  ed.  Raccolta  di  Documenti  e  Studi.  Pub. 
dalla  R.  Commissione  Colombiana,  etc.  Roma,  1892.  Parte  I,  vol.  1, 
213-223  contains  text  of  Ulloa's  Italian  translation  of  Ramon  Pane 
with  an  apparatus  criticus. 

Martius,Dr.  Carl  F.  Ph.  v.  Beitrage  zur  Ethnographie  und  Sprach- 
enkunde  Amerika's  zumal  Brasiliens.  2  vols.  Leipzig,  1867.  Vol. 
II,  pp.  314-18,  contains  a  Latin-Taino  vocabulary  based  chiefly  on 
Rafinesque's  collections. 

Montejo  y  Robledo,  Dr.  Bonifacio.  Procedencia  Americana  de 
las  Bubas.  Actas  del  Congreso  Internacional  de  Americanistas,  4a  Reunion. 
Madrid,  1881,  pp.  334-419.  Evidence  from  Ramon  Pane  discussed  pp. 
358,  360. 

Mueller,  J.  G.  Geschichte  der  Amerikanischen  Urreligionen,  Basel, 
1855.  pp.  155-185  are  devoted  to  the  religion  of  the  non-Carib  aborigines 
of  the  West  Indies. 

Peschel,  Oscar.  Geschichte  des  Zeitalters  der  Entdeckungen,  2** 
Aufl.  Stuttgart,  1877.  On  pp.  147-48  the  cosmogony  of  the  Haytians 
is  briefly  described. 

Rafinesque,  C.  S.  The  American  Nations;  or  Outlines  of  their 
General  History,  Ancient  and  Modern,  etc.,  etc.  Philadelphia,  1836, 
pp.  162-260.  Interesting  linguistic  material  with  much  highly  fantastic 
conjecture. 


11 


TREATISE  OF  FRIAR  RAMON*  ON  THE  ANTIQUI- 
TIES OF  THE  INDIANS  WHICH  HE  AS  ONE 
WHO  KNOWS  THEIR  LANGUAGE  DILIGENTLY 
COLLECTED  BY  COMMAND  OF  THE  ADMIRAL. 

I  Friar  Ramon  a  poor  Hermit  of  the  Order  of  St.  Jerome 
by  command  of  the  illustrious  lord,  the  Admiral  and 
Viceroy  and  governor  of  the  Islands  and  of  the  main  land 
of  the  Indies,  write  this  which  I  have  been  able  to  learn 
and  to  know  of  the  belief  and  idolatry  of  the  Indians  and 
how  they  worship  their  gods.  Of  which  matters  I  shall 
give  an  account  in  the  present  treatise. 

Each  one  in  praying  to  the  idols  which  he  has  in  his 
house,  and  which  are  called  by  them  cemist  worships  in 
his  own  fashion  and  superstition. 

They  hold  that  he  is  (as)  in  heaven  immortal  and  that 
no  one  can  see  him,  and  that  he  has  a  mother  and  that  he 
had  no  beginning,  and  this  [god]  they  call  Iocahuuague 
Maorocon,J  and  his  mother  they  call  Atabei,  Iermaoguacar, 
Apito  and  Zuimaco  which  are  five  names. §    Those  of  whom 

♦The  correct  form  of  the  name  has  been  substituted  for  the  common  form  Roman. 

fCemini  is  the  form  used  in  the  text  and  may  have  been  invented  by  Ulloa  as  an 
Italian  plural.  Las  Casas  writes:  "These  they  generally  call  Cemi  the  last  syllable 
long  with  the  acute  accent"    Docs.  In€d.  de  Espana.  LXVI,  436. 

JLas  Casas,  op.  ext.  434,  gives  the  name  Yocahu  Vagua  Maorocoti.  It  differs  only  in 
the  last  syllable  from  the  Italian  text  which  may  be  rewritten  as  Jocahu  vague  Maor- 
ocon.  Peter  Martyr  has  Iocauna  Guamaonocon.  This  has  been  accepted  by  modern 
writers  as  the  correct  form  e.  g.  Bachiller  of  Morales.  Cuba  Primitiva,  167  and  L6on. 
Douay,  Etudes  Etymologiques,  27.  As  Las  Casas  lived  many  years  in  Espanolar 
his  authority  should  be  carefully  considered.  Las  Casas,  035.  cit.  p.  475  mentions  a 
Cemi  whose  name  was  Yocahuguama. 

§Peter  Martyr  gives  the  five  names  as  Attabeira,  Mamona,  Guacarapita,  Iiella  and 
Guimazoa.  The  Italian  text  of  Ramon  is  here  apparently  corrupt  as  it  gives  only 
four  names  and  calls  them  five,  Iiella  is  omitted  from  the  list  and  the  first  three  of 
the  names  is  given  by  Peter  Martyr,  Attabeira,  Mamona,  Guacaripita  appear  as 
Attabei,  Iermaoguacar,  Apito.  Apparently  in  Ramon's  MS.  the  second  name  was  very 
illegible.  By  dividing  the  names  differently  we  see  that  the  trouble  mainly  lies  there. 
Attabeira,     Mamdna,  Gucaripita, 

ra  I  mamdna] 
Attabei,  Ier|  mao       |  guacar,  Apito, 

Las  Casas  read  it.  "Atabex  y  un  hermano  Guaca"  conjecturing  that  what  Ulloa 
copied  as  Iermao  was  hermano,  "brother."  The  whole  passage  is  "The  people  of  this 
island  of  Espanola  had  an  assured  faith  and  knowledge  of  one  true  and  only  God 
who  was  immortal  and  invisible,  whom  no  one  can  see,  who  had  no  beginning, 


12 


I  write  this  are  of  the  island  Espanola;  because  of  the  other 
islands  I  know  nothing  never  having  seen  them.  Like- 
wise they  know  from  what  direction  they  came  and  whence 
the  sun  had  his  origin  and  the  moon  and  how  the  sea  was 
made  and  whither  the  dead  go.  And  they  believe  that 
the  dead  appear  on  the  roadways  when  one  goes  alone, 
wherefore  when  many  go  together  they  do  not  appear  to 
them.  All  this  those  who  have  gone  before  have  made 
them  believe,  because  these  people  know  not  how  to  read 
or  to  count  beyond  ten. 

CHAPTER  I. 

From  what  direction  the  Indians  have  come  and  in  what 
manner. 

Espanola  has  a  province  called  Caanau*  in  which  there  is  a  mountain 
which  is  called  Cantaf  where  there  are  two  caves,  the  one  named  Caciba- 
giagua  and  the  other  Amaiuua.J  From  Cacibagiagua  came  forth  the 
larger  part  of  the  people  who  settled  in  the  island.  When  people  were 
in  these  caves  watch  was  kept  by  night  and  the  care  of  this  was  given 
to  one  whose  name  was  Marocael;§  and  him,  because  one  day  he  delayed 
to  come  back  to  the  door,  the  sun  carried  off.  And  when  it  was 
seen  that  the  sun  had  carried  him  off  they  closed  the  door;  and  so 
he  was  changed  into  stone  near  the  door.  Next  they  say  that  others 
going  off  to  fish  were  taken  by  the  sun  and  they  became  trees,  called  by 
them  IobiJ  and  otherwise  they  are  called  mirabolans.  The  reason 
why  Marocael  kept  watch  and  stood  guard  was  to  watch  in  what  direction 
he  wished  to  send  or  to  divide  the  people,  and  it  seems  that  he  delayed 
to  his  own  greater  hurt. 


whose  dwelling  place  and  habitation  is  heaven,  and  they  named  him  Yocahu  Vagua 
Maorocoti.  .  .  .  With  this  true  and  catholic  knowledge  of  the  true  God  they 
mingled  these  errors  to  wit,  that  God  had  a  mother  and  her  brother  Guaca  and 
others  of  this  sort."    Docs.  Ined.    LXVI.  434. 

*Caunana  in  Peter  Martyr. 

fCauta  in  Peter  Martyr,  and  the  correct  form. 

JCazibaxagua  and  Amaiauna  in  Peter  Martyr  who  says  in  Decade  vii,  chap  8, 
that  in  the  ancestral  lore  of  the  Haytians  the  island  was  viewed  as  a  great  monster 
of  the  female  sex  and  that  the  great  cave  of  Guaccaiarima  was  her  organs  of  genera- 
tion— Cf.  Peschel,  Zeitalter  der  Entdeckungen,  147  and  Ehrenreich,  Die  My  then  und 
Legenden  der  Sudamerikanischen  Urvolker,  33. 

§Machochael  in  Peter  Martyr.  This  is  apparently  the  correct  form.  Cf.  Bachiller 
y  Morales,  315. 

||Iobo  (Jobo,  or  hobo).  The  name  of  this  tree  and  fruit  is  still  in  use  in  Santo 
Domingo,  Bachiller  y  Morales,  300. 


13 


CHAPTER  II. 

How  the  men  were  divided  from  the  women. 

It  came  to  pass  that  one  man  whose  name  was  Guagugiona*  said  to 
another  whose  name  was  Giadruuaua,t  that  he  should  go  to  gather 
an  herb  called  digo  with  which  they  cleanse  the  body  when  they  go  to 
wash  themselves.  He  went  before  day,  (but)  the  sun  seized  him  on  the 
way  and  he  became  a  bird  which  sings  in  the  morning  like  the  nightin- 
gale and  is  called  Giahuba  Bagiael.  Guagugiona  seeing  that  he  whom 
he  had  sent  to  gather  the  digo  did  not  return  resolved  to  go  out  of  the 
cave  Cacibagiagua. 

CHAPTER  III. 

That  Guagugiona  resolved  to  go  away  in  anger,  seeing  that  those 
whom  he  had  sent  to  gather  the  digo  for  washing  themselves  did  not 
return;  and  he  said  to  the  women  "Leave  your  husbands  and  let  us  go 
into  other  lands  and  we  will  carry  off  enough  jewels.  Leave  your  sons 
and  we  will  carry  only  the  plants  with  us  and  then  we  will  return  for 
them." 

CHAPTER  IV. 

Guagugiona  set  forth  with  all  the  women  and  went  off  in  search  of 
other  lands,  and  came  to  MatininoJ  where  he  left  the  women;  and  he 
went  away  into  another  region  called  Guanin  and  they  had  left  the  little 
children  near  a  brook.  Then  when  hunger  began  to  trouble  them,  it 
is  related,  that  they  wailed  and  called  upon  their  mothers  who  had  gone 
off;  and  the  fathers  were  not  able  to  give  help  to  the  children  calling 
in  hunger  for  their  mothers,  saying  "mama"  as  if  to  speak,  but  really 
asking  for  the  breast.  §  And  wailing  in  this  fashion  and  asking  for  the 
breast,  saying  "too,  too,"||  as  one  who  asks  for  something  with  great 
longing,  and  very  urgently,  they  were  changed  into  little  animals, 


*Vaguoniona  in  Peter  Martyr.  Bachiller  y  Morales,  thinks  the  proper  form  is  Gua- 
goniona.    See  his  discussion  of  this  and  the  two  following  names,  Cuba  Primitiva,  275 . 
tThis  name  is  omitted  in  Peter  Martyr. 

JUsually  identified  with  Martinique.  This  passage  is  convincing  evidence  that 
the  Amazon  legends  in  America  were  indigenous  and  not  transmitted  there  or  deve- 
loped by  the  misapprehensions  of  the  first  discoverers.  Ehrenreich  is  convinced 
that  these  legends  are  indigenous  although  he  does  not  refer  to  this  evidence.  See 
his  Mythen  und  Legenden,  65.  Columbus  early  and  frequently  heard  of  the  island  of 
Matinino  which  was  inhabited  only  by  women. 

§La  tetta,  Apparently  the  Italian  text  used  by  the  translator  of  the  English  version 
of  the  Historie  read  "la  terra"  in  this  passage  for  it  is  there  rendered  "to  beg  of  the 
earth"! 

||Toa,  toa,  in  Peter  Martyr. 


14 


after  the  fashion  of  dwarfs*  (frogs)  which  are  called  Tonaf  because  of 
their  asking  for  the  breast,  and  that  in  this  way  all  the  men  were  left 
without  women. 

CHAPTER  V. 

And  later  on  another  occasion  women  went  there  from  the  said  Island 
Espafiola,  which  formerly  was  called  Aiti,  and  is  so  called  by  its  inhabi- 
tants; and  these  and  other  islands  they  called  Bouhi.J  And  because 
they  have  no  writing  nor  letters  they  cannot  give  a  good  account  of  what 
they  have  learned  from  their  forbears;  and  therefore  they  do  not  agree  in 
what  they  say,  nor  can  what  they  relate  be  recorded  in  an  orderly  fashion. 

When  Guahagiona  went  away,  he  that  carried  away  all  the  women, 
he  likewise  took  with  him  the  women  of  his  Cacique  whose  name  was 
Anacacugia,  deceiving  him  as  he  deceived  the  others;  and,  moreover, 
a  brother-in-law  of  Guahagiona  Anacacuia,  §  who  went  off  with  him  went 
on  the  sea;  and  Guahagiona  said  to  his  brother-in-law,  being  in  the  canoe, 
see  what  a  fine  cobo  is  there  in  the  water  and  this  cobo  is  the  sea  snail,  and 
him  peering  into  the  water  to  see  the  cobo  Guahagiona  his  brother-in-law 
seized  by  the  feet  and  cast  into  the  sea;  and  so  he  took  all  the  women 
for  himself,  and  he  left  those  of  Matinino  (i.  e.  at  Matinino)  where  it  is 
reported  there  are  no  people  but  women  to-day.  And  he  went  off  to 
another  island  which  is  called  Guanin||  and  it  received  this  name  on 
account  of  what  he  took  away  from  it  when  he  went  away. 

CHAPTER  VI. 

That  Guahagiona  returned  to  Canta,  (Cauta)  mentioned  above, 
whence  he  had  taken  the  women.  They  say  that  being  in  the  land 
whence  he  had  gone  Guahagiona  saw  that  he  had  left  in  the  sea  one  woman, 
and  that  he  was  greatly  pleased  with  her  and  straightway  sought  out 
many  washes  (or  washing  places)  to  wash  himself  being  full  of  those 
sores  which  we  call  the  French  disease.  IF    She  then  put  him  in  a  Guanara 

*Nane.  The  correct  reading  is  rane,  "frogs,"  as  appears  in  Peter  Martyr  and  from 
the  context. 

fUlloa's  misreading  rane  as  nane  may  have  misled  him  in  the  latter  part  of  the 
sentence.  The  version  in  Peter  Martyr  makes  much  better  sense.  Bachiller  y 
Morales,  questions  the  existence  of  such  a  word  as  Tona,  p.  343.  Brasseur  de  Bour- 
bourg  conjectured  that  Toa  may  have  meant  "frog"  as  well  as  "breast." 

JApparently  in  the  sense  of  homes  or  dwelling  places.  Buhi  or  Bohio  ordinarily 
means  cabin. 

§The  punctuation  follows  the  text  of    the  original.     Perhaps  it  should  be 
Guahagiona,  Anacacuia,  making  the  second  name  that  of  the  brother-in-law. 
\\Guamn  means  an  inferior  kind  of  gold. 

ITThat  Ramon  Pane,  before  1496,  should  have  recorded  this  legend  of  the  culture 
hero  Guahagiona  (Guagugiona,  Vaguoniona)  is  conclusive  evidence  that  Syphilis  had 
existed  in  the  West  Indies  long  before  the  arrival  of  the  Spaniards — Cf.  Iwan  Bloch 
Der  Ursprung  der  Syphilis,  202-205.  The  name  mal  Francese  is  no  doubt  Ulloa's 
translation  of  las  bubas,  the  Spanish  name  of  the  disease. 


15 


which  means  a  place  apart;  and  so  he  was  healed  of  these  sores.  Then 
she  asked  permission  of  him  to  go  on  her  way  and  he  gave  it  to  her. 
This  woman  was  named  Guabonito;  and  Guahagiona  changed  his  name 
and  thenceforward  he  was  called  Biberoci  Guahagiona.  And  the  woman 
Guabonito  gave  Biberoci  Guahagiona  many  guanins*  and  many  cibef 
to  wear  tied  on  his  arms.  Because  in  those  countries  colecibi%  are  of 
stones  like  marble  and  they  wear  them  tied  on  the  arms  and  on  the  neck 
and  the  guanins  they  wear  in  the  ears  making  holes  when  they  are 
children;  and  they  are  of  metal  as  it  were  of  a  florin.  And  the  beginnings 
(the  originators)  of  these  guanins  they  say  were  Guabonito,  Albeborael, 
Guahagiona,  and  the  father  of  Albeborael.  Guahagiona  remained  in 
the  land  with  his  father  whose  name  was  Hiauna,  his  grandson  (figliuolo) 
on  his  father's  side  (i.  e.  Guahagiona 's  son)  was  named  Hia  Guaili  Guanin 
which  means  grandson  of  Hiauna;  and  thence  thereafter  he  was  called 
Guanin  and  is  so  called  to-day.  And  since  they  have  no  letters  nor 
writings  they  cannot  relate  well  such  fables  nor  can  I  write  them  well. 
Wherefore  I  believe  I  shall  put  down  first  what  should  be  last  and  last 
what  should  be  first.  But  all  that  I  write  is  related  by  them  as  I  write 
it  and  so  I  set  it  forth  as  I  have  understood  it  from  the  people  of  the 
country. 

CHAPTER  VII. 

How  there  were  women  again  in  the  island  of  Aiti  which 
is  now  called  Espanola. 

They  say  that  one  day  the  men  went  off  to  bathe  and  being  in  the  water, 
it  rained  heavily,  and  that  they  were  very  desirous  of  having  women, 
and  that  oftentimes  when  it  rained,  they  had  gone  to  search  for  the 
traces  of  their  women  nor  had  been  able  to  find  any  news  of  them,  but 
that  on  that  day  while  bathing,  they  say,  they  saw  fall  down  from  some 
trees  and  hiding  in  the  branches  a  certain  kind  of  persons  that  were  not 
men  nor  women  nor  had  the  natural  parts  of  the  male  or  female.  They 
went  to  take  them  but  they  fled  away  as  if  they  had  been  eagles,  §  (eels) 
wherefore  they  called  two  or  three  men  by  the  order  of  their  cacique, 
since  they  were  not  able  to  take  them  for  him  in  order  that  they  might 
watch  to  see  how  many  there  were  and  that  they  might  seek  out  for 
each  one  a  man  who  was  Caracaracol  because  they  have  their  hands 
rough,  and  that  so  they  held  (could  hold)  them  tightly.  They  told 
the  Cacique  that  there  were  four,  and  so  they  brought  four  men  who 
were  Caracaracoli.  This  Caracaracol  is  a  disease  like  scab  which  makes 
the  body  very  rough.    After  they  had  caught  them  they  took  counsel 

♦Jewels  of  guanin. 
tBeads. 

^Strings  of  beads.    Bacbiller  y  Morales,  251. 

§Aquile.     Read  anguille,  "eels."    A  mistake  of  the  translator  Ulloa.  Peter 
Martyr  has  anguillae  which  is  undoubtedly  the  right  word. 


16 


together  over  them  what  they  could  do  to  make  them  women  since 
they  did  not  have  the  natural  parts  of  male  or  female. 

CHAPTER  VIII. 
How  they  found  a  device  to  make  them  women. 

They  sought  a  bird  which  is  called  Inriri,  in  ancient  times  Inrire  Cahu- 
uaial,  which  bores  trees  and  in  our  language  is  called  woodpecker  (pico). 
And  likewise  they  took  these  women  without  male  or  female  organs 
and  bound  their  feet  and  hands  and  took  this  bird  just  mentioned  and 
bound  him  to  the  body  and  he  thinking  that  they  were  logs  began  to  do 
his  accustomed  task  pecking  and  boring  in  the  place  where  the  natural 
parts  of  women  are  wont  to  be.  In  this  fashion,  then,  the  Indians  say 
that  they  had  women  according  to  what  the  oldest  men  relate.*  Since 
I  wrote  in  haste  and  did  not  have  paper  enough  I  could  not  put  down 
in  its  place  that  which  by  mistake  I  transferred  to  another  place,  but 
notwithstanding  that  I  have  in  reality  made  no  mistake  since  they 
believe  it  all  as  has  been  written. 

Let  us  turn  now  to  that  which  we  should  have  recorded  first,  i.  e.their 
belief  as  to  the  origin  and  beginning  of  the  sea. 

CHAPTER  IX. 
How  they  say  the  sea  was  made. 

There  was  a  man  called  Giaiaf  whose  name  they  do  not  know  and  his 
son  called  Giaiael  which  means  son  of  Giaia.  This  Giaiael  wishing  to 
slay  his  father,  he  sent  him  into  exile  where  he  remained  banished  four 
months,  and  then  his  father  slew  him  and  put  his  bones  in  a  gourd  and 
fastened  it  on  the  roof  of  his  cabin  where  it  remained  fastened  some 
time.  And  it  came  to  pass  that  one  day  Giaia,  longing  to  see  his  son, 
said  to  his  wife,  "I  want  to  see  our  son  Giaiel;  and  she  was  pleased  at 
that;  and  he  took  down  the  gourd  and  turned  it  over  to  see  the  bones 
of  his  son,  and  from  it  came  forth  many  fishes  large  and  small.  Where- 
fore, seeing  that  the  bones  were  changed  into  fishes  they  resolved  to  eat 
them.  One  day,  therefore,  they  say  that  Giaia  having  gone  to  his 
ConichiX,  which  means  his  lands  that  were  his  inheritance  there  came 
four  sons  of  a  woman  whose  name  was  Itiba  Tahuuaua,  all  from  one 
womb  and  twins;  and  this  woman  having  died  in  travail  they  opened 
her  and  drew  out  these  for  sons,  and  the  first  that  they  drew  out  was 
Caracaracol  which  means  scabby.  This  Caracaracol  had  the  name 
 §.    The  others  had  no  name. 


*Cf.    Ehrenreich,  Mythen  und  Legenden,  56  for  some  analogous  legends, 
flaia  in  Peter  Martyr. 

JUsed  by  Ulloa  as  an  Italian  plural  of  the  Haytian  canuco,  garden  plot  or  farm. 
§Dimiuan  is  apparently  the  name  omitted;  see  next  chapter. 


/ 


17 


CHAPTER  X. 

When  the  four  sons,  all  born  together,  of  Itiba  Tahuuaua  who  died 
in  travail  with  them,  went  to  lay  hold  of  the  gourd  of  Giaia  where  his 
son  Agiael*  was  who  was  changed  into  a  fish;  and  none  of  them  ventured 
to  lay  hands  on  it  except  Dimiuan  Caracaracol  who  took  it  from  its 
place  and  all  satisfied  themselves  with  fish;  and  while  they  were  eating 
they  perceived  that  Giaia  was  coming  from  his  farms,  and  wishing, 
in  this  haste  to  fasten  the  gourd  to  its  place  again  they  did  not  fasten 
it  well  and  so  it  fell  to  the  ground  and  broke.  They  say  that 
so  great  was  the  mass  of  water  that  came  out  of  the  gourd  that 
it  filled  the  whole  earth,  and  with  it  issued  many  fish,  and  from 
this  according  to  their  account  the  sea  had  its  beginning.  These 
then  departed  from  thence  and  found  a  man  whose  name  was  Conel 
and  he  was  dumb. 

CHAPTER  XI. 

Of  the  things  which  befel  the  four  brothers  when  they 
fled  from  Giaia. 

Now  these  (brothers)  as  soon  as  they  came  to  the  door  of  Bassamanaco 
and  perceived  that  he  carried  Cazzabi,  f  said,  "Ahiacauo  Guarocoel" 
which  means  "let  us  know  this  our  grandfather."  In  like  manner, 
Demiuan  Caracaracol  seeing  his  brothers  before  him  went  within  to 
see  if  he  could  have  some  Cazzabi.  And  this  Cazzabi  is  the  bread  that 
is  eaten  in  the  country.  Caracaracol  having  entered  the  house  of  Aiam- 
auacoj  asked  him  for  Cazzabi  which  is  the  bread  above  mentioned; 
and  he  put  his  hand  on  his  own  nose  and  threw  at  him  a  guanguaio  § 
hitting  him  in  the  back.  This  guanguaio  was  full  of  cogioba||  which 
he  had  had  made  that  day;  the  cogioba  is  a  certain  powder  which  they 
take  sometimes  to  purge  themselves,  and  for  other  effects  which  you 
will  hear  of  later.  They  take  it  with  a  cane  about  a  foot  long  and  put 
one  end  in  the  nose  and  the  other  in  the  powder,  and  in  this  manner 
they  draw  it  into  themselves  through  the  nose  and  this  purges  them 
thoroughly.  And  thus  he  gave  him  that  guanguaio  for  bread,  .  .  IT 
and  went  off  much  enraged  because  they  asked  him  for  it. 

♦Giaiael. 
tCassava. 

JThis  name  seems  to  be  compounded  of  part  of  Bassamanaco  and  Ahiacauo. 
Bachiller  y  Morales  in  his  version  substitutes  the  latter  for  it  in  the  form 
Ayacauo. 

§Defined  by  Brasseur  de  Bourbourg,  as  a  bag  for  holding  tobacco. 

HTobacco.  Las  Casas  uses  the  form  Cohoba.  On  the  various  native  words  for 
tobacco  see  a  valuable  art,  by  Dr.  A  Ernst.  On  the  Etymology  of  the  word  Tobacco. 
The  American  Anthropologist,  II,  133-141  (1889). 

TT"E  Cirtose  pan."    These  words  I  have  not  been  able  to  explain. 


18 


Caracaracol  after  this  returned  to  his  brothers  and  told  them  what 
had  happened  to  him  with  Baiamanicoel*  and  of  the  blow  that  he  hit 
him  with  the  guanguaio  on  one  shoulder  and  that  it  pained  him  very 
much.  Then  his  brothers  looked  at  his  shoulder  and  saw  that  it  was 
much  swollen.  And  this  swelling  increased  so  much  that  he  was  like 
to  die  of  it.  Wherefore  they  tried  to  cut  it  and  could  not;  and  taking 
a  stone  axe  they  opened  it  and  there  came  out  a  live  turtle,  a  female; 
and  so  they  built  their  cabin  and  cared  for  the  turtle.  Of  this  I  have 
not  heard  (or  understood)  anything  else,  and  what  we  have  written  was 
of  little  profit.  And  further  they  say  that  the  sun  and  the  moon  came 
out  of  a  cave  which  is  situated  in  the  country  of  a  cacique  named  Maucia 
Tiuueif  and  the  name  of  the  cave  is  GiououauaJ  and  they  hold  it  in 
high  regard,  and  it  is  all  painted  in  their  fashion  without  any  figure, 
with  many  leaves  and  other  things  of  that  sort,  and  in  this  cave  there 
are  two  cemis,  of  stone,  small  about  a  foot  high  with  their  hands  tied, 
and  they  looked  as  if  they  sweated.  These  cemis  they  hold  in  great 
regard,  and  when  it  did  not  rain  they  say  they  went  there  to  visit  them 
and  suddenly  it  rained.  And  one  of  these  cemis  is  called  by  them 
Boinaiel§  and  the  other  Maroio.  || 

CHAPTER  XII. 

What  they  think  as  to  how  the  dead  go  wandering  about 
and  as  to  what  manner  of  folk  they  are  and  what  they  do. 

They  believe  that  there  is  a  place  whither  the  dead  go  which  is  called 
Coaibai  and  lies  in  a  part  of  the  island  called  Soraia.^f  The  first  man 
that  was  in  Coaibai  was,  they  relate,  one  whose  name  was  Machetaurie- 
Guaiaua,  who  was  the  lord  of  this  Coaibai,  the  home  and  dwelling  place 
of  the  dead. 

CHAPTER  XIII. 

Of  the  shape  which  they  say  the  dead  are. 

They  say  that  during  the  day  they  are  shut  in,  and  by  night  they  go 
out  to  walk;  and  they  eat  of  a  certain  fruit  which  is  called  guabazza** 
which  has  the  flavor  of  (the  Quince)  ft    That  by  day  they  are  .... 


♦Still  another  variant  of  the  name  Bassa-Manaco. 

tMachinnech  in  Peter  Martyr.  Bachiller  y  Morales  thinks  the  form  in  the  text 
should  be  Manaia  Tiunel. 

Jlouanaboina  in  Peter  Martyr. 

§Binthaitel  in  Peter  Martyr. 

||Marohu  in  Peter  Martyr. 

ITSoraia  means  "west",  Bachiller  y  Morales. 

**Guannaba  in  Peter  Martyr  and  apparently  the  correct  form.  Bachiller  y  Morales 
identifies  it  with  the  fruit  called  Guanabana. 

ttThe  gap  in  the  Italian  text  has  been  supplied  from  Peter  Martyr. 


19 


and  at  night  they  are  changed  into  fruit,*  and  they  have  feasts  and  go 
with  the  living,  and  to  know  them  they  follow  this  practice,  they  touch 
their  belly  and  if  they  do  not  find  the  navel  they  say  that  he  is  operito 
which  means  dead.  Because  they  say  the  dead  have  no  navel.  And 
so  sometimes  they  are  deceived  when  they  do  not  give  heed  to  this; 
and  they  lie  with  some  woman  from  Comboi,  (Coaibai)f  and  when 
they  think  they  have  them  in  their  arms,  they  have  nothing  because 
they  disappear  in  a  trice.  This  belief  they  hold  in  this  matter  to  the 
present  day.  If  the  person  is  alive  they  call  the  spirit  Goeiz,  and  after 
death  they  call  (it)  Opia.  The  Goeiz  they  say  appears  often  both  in 
the  form  of  a  man  and  in  the  form  of  a  woman.  And  they  say  that 
there  was  a  man  that  wished  to  contend  with  it,  and  that  clinching  it, 
it  disappeared,  and  that  the  man  thrust  out  his  arms  in  another  direction 
over  some  trees  to  which  he  hung.  And  this  they  all  believe  both  small 
and  great  and  that  it  appears  to  them  in  the  form  of  father  or  mother, 
or  brothers  or  parents  and  in  other  forms.  The  fruit  which  they  say 
the  dead  eat  is  of  the  size  of  a  quince. 

These  dead  do  not  appear  to  them  in  the  day  time,  but  always  by 
night,  and  therefore  with  much  fear  do  they  venture  to  go  forth  alone 
at  night. 

CHAPTER  XIV. 
Whence  they  derive  this  and  who  keeps  it  in  such  credit. 

There  are  some  men  who  practise  among  them  and  are  called  Bohuti,J 
and  these  go  through  many  deceits  as  we  shall  relate  further,  to  make 
them  believe  that  they  talk  with  those  (spirits)  and  that  they  know 
everything  that  is  done  and  their  secrets;  and  that  when  they  are  ill 
they  take  away  the  evil;  and  thus  they  deceive  them,  because  I  have 
seen  part  of  it  with  my  own  eyes,  although  of  the  other  things  I  will 
relate  only  what  I  have  heard  from  many  especially  from  the  principal 
men  with  whom  I  have  had  to  do  more  than  with  others;  because  these 
believe  such  fables  more  firmly  than  the  others;  because  like  the  Moors 
they  have  their  laws  reduced  to  ancient  songs  ;§  by  which  they  are 
ruled  as  the  Moors  are  by  their  scripture.  And  when  they  wish  to  sing 
these  songs  of  theirs,  they  play  upon  a  certain  instrument  which  is  called 
maiohauau,\\  which  is  of  wood  and  hollow,  strongly  made  and  very 
thin,  an  ell  long  and  a  half  an  ell  in  breadth,  and  the  part  where  it  is 
played  is  made  in  the  shape  of  the  pincers  of  a  farrier,  and  the  other 

♦The  repetition  here  of  the  first  sentence  with  a  variation  altogether  irreconcilable 
with  the  context  shows  that  the  text  is  corrupt. 
fBachiller  y  Morales  thus  corrects  the  text. 

JBoitius  in  Peter  Martyr  and  bohique  and  behique  in  Las  Casas,  see  Docs.  Inecl. 
LXVI.  436.  438. 

§Oviedo  gives  an  account  of  these  areytos  as  they  were  called. 

HBrasseur  de  Bourbourg  gives  this  word  as  Maiouauan  and  defines  it  as  a  sort,  of 
drum. 


20 


part  is  like  a  club.  It  looks  like  a  gourd  with  a  long  neck;  and  they 
play  this  instrument,  which  has  so  loud  a  sound  that  it  is  heard  a  league 
and  a  half.  To  this  sound  they  sing  the  songs  which  they  learn  by  heart; 
and  the  principal  men  play  it  who  have  learned  from  childhood  to  sound 
it  and  to  sing  by  it  according  to  their  custom.  Let  us  now  pass  on  to  treat 
of  many  things  relating  to  other  ceremonies  and  customs  of  these  heathen. 

CHAPTER  XV. 

The  observances  of  these  Indian  Buhuitihu,  (Bohuti) 
and  how  they  practice  medicine  and  teach  the  people  and 
in  their  cures  they  are  oftentimes  themselves  taken  in. 

AH  or  the  majority  of  the  people  of  the  island  of  Espanola  have  many 
cemis  of  different  kinds.  One  has  the  bones«of  his  father  and  his  mother, 
and  kindred  and  ancestors;  (and  there  are  others)  which  are  made  of 
stone  or  of  wood.  And  many  have  them  of  both  kinds;  some  (those) 
which  speak;  and  others  (those)  which  make  the  things  grow  which 
they  eat;  and  others  which  bring  rain;  and  others  which  make  the  winds 
blow.  These  simple-minded  ignorant  people  believe  these  idols,  or  to 
speak  more  fittingly  these  devils,  do  these  things  not  having  knowledge 
of  our  holy  faith.  When  one  is  ill  they  bring  the  Buhuitihu  (Bohuti) 
to  him  as  a  physician.  The  physician  is  obliged  to  abstain  from  food 
like  the  sick  man  himself  and  to  play  the  part  of  sick  man  which  is  done  in 
this  way  which  you  will  now  hear.  He  must  needs  purge  himself  like 
the  sick  man  and  to  purge  himself  he  takes  a  certain  powder  called  cohoba* 
snuffing  it  up  his  nose  which  intoxicates  them  so  that  they  do  not 
know  what  they  do  and  in  this  condition  they  speak  many  things  inco- 
herently in  which  they  say  they  are  talking  with  the  cemis  and  that 
by  them  they  are  informed  how  the  sickness  came  upon  him. 

CHAPTER  XVI. 
What  these  Buhuitihu,  (Bohuti)  do. 

When  they  go  to  visit  a  sick  man  before  they  set  out  from  their  cabins 
they  take  some  soot  from  pots  or  pounded  charcoal  and  blacken  the  face 
to  make  the  sick  man  believe  what  seems  good  to  them  as  to  his  ailment; 
and  then  they  take  some  small  bones  and  a  little  flesh  and  wrapping  it 
all  together  in  something  so  that  it  won't  drop,  put  it  in  the  mouth, 
the  sick  man  having  been  already  purged  with  the  powder  as  we  have 
said.  The  physician  then  goes  into  the  cabin  of  the  sick  man  and  sits 
down  and  all  are  silent;  and  if  there  are  children  there,  they  put  them 
out  in  order  that  they  may  not  hinder  the  Buhuitihu  (Bohuti)  in  his 
duties;  nor  does  any  one  remain  in  the  cabin  except  one  or  two  of  the 
principal  men. 

*Tobacco. 


21 


And  thus  being  alone  they  take  some  herbs  of  the  Gioia*  .  i 
broad  and  another  herb  wrapped  in  a  leaf  of  an  onion  half  a  quarter 
long;  and  one  of  the  above-mentioned  Gioia  is  what  they  all  usually 
take.  And  crumbling  it  with  their  hands  they  make  a  paste  of  it  and 
then  put  it  in  their  mouths  by  night  to  make  them  vomit  what  they 
have  eaten,  in  order  that  it  may  not  hurt  them;  and  then  they  begin  to 
sing  the  above-mentioned  song.  And  lighting  a  torch  they  take  that 
juice.  This  done  at  the  beginning,  and  waiting  somewhat  the  Buhuitihu 
(Bohuti)  rises  and  goes  toward  the  sick  man  who  is  seated  in  the  middle 
of  his  cabin  as  has  been  said  and  turns  him  around  twice  as  he  pleases. 
Then  he  stands  before  him  and  takes  him  by  the  legs  feeling  his  thighs 
and  running  his  hands  down  to  his  feet,  then  he  draws  him  hard  as  if 
he  wished  to  pull  something  off;  then  he  goes  to  the  entrance  of  the 
cabin  and  closes  the  door,  and  speaks  saying  "Begone  to  the  mountains, 
or  to  the  sea  or  whither  thou  wilt,';  and  blowing  like  one  who  blows 
in  winnowing  he  turns  around  again  and  puts  his  hands  together 
and  closes  his  mouth  and  his  hand  shake  as  if  he  were  very  cold,  and  he 
blows  on  his  hands  and  then  draws  in  his  breath  again  like  one  who  is 
sucking  the  marrow  from  a  bone  and  he  sucks  the  sick  man  on  the  neck, 
on  the  stomach,  shoulders,  jaws,  breasts,  belly  and  many  other  parts 
of  the  body.  This  done  they  begin  to  cough  and  to  make  faces  as  if 
they  had  eaten  something  bitter,  and  he  spits  into  his  hand  and  draws 
out  that  which  we  mentioned  which  he  had  put  in  his  mouth  either  at 
his  own  cabin  or  on  the  way,  either  a  stone  or  meat  or  a  bone,  as  has  been 
said.  And  if  it  is  anything  eatable,  he  says  to  the  sick  man,  "Take 
notice!  You  have  eaten  something  which  has  brought  on  this  illness 
which  you  suffer  from.  See  how  I  have  taken  out  of  your  body  what 
your  cemi  had  put  in  your  body  because  you  did  not  say  your  prayers 
to  him  or  did  not  build  him  some  temple  or  give  him  something  from 
your  possessions."  And  if  it  is  a  stone  he  says,  "keep  it  safe."  And 
sometimes  they  are  convinced  that  these  stones  are  good,  and  that 
they  help  women  in  labor,  and  they  keep  it  very  carefully  wrapped  in 
cotton  in  little  baskets  and  give  them  to  eat  what  they  eat  themselves, 
and  they  do  the  same  to  the  cemis  which  they  have  in  their  cabins. 
Upon  solemn  days  when  they  bring  out  much  to  eat  either  fish,  meat,  or 
bread  or  anything  else,  they  put  everything  in  the  cabin  of  the  cemis 
that  the  idol  may  eat  of  it. 

The  next  day  they  take  all  this  food  to  their  own  cabins  after  the 
cemi  has  eaten.  And  so  may  God  help  them  if  the  cemi  eats  of  that; 
or  of  anything  else,  the  said  cemi  being  a  dead  thing  made  of  stone  or 
wood. 


♦Bachiller  y  Morales  thinks  the  word  a  textual  error  for  the  form  cogioba  used  above, 
ch.  xi,  yet  see  below  ch.  xvii  where  it  is  described  and  another  name  Zachon  is  men- 
tioned. 


22 


CHAPTER  XVII. 
How  sometimes  these  physicians  are  deceived. 

When  they  have  done  what  has  been  described  and  still  the  sick  man 
dies,  if  the  dead  man  has  many  relatives  or  was  lord  of  a  village  (castella) 
and  can  resist  the  said  Buhuitihu  (Bohuti)  which  means  physician, 
(because  those  who  have  little  power  do  not  venture  to  contend  with 
these  physicians)  he  who  wishes  to  do  harm  to  him  does  this.  Wanting 
to  know  if  the  sick  man  died  through  the  fault  of  the  physician  or  whether 
he  did  not  do  what  was  prescribed,  they  take  an  herb  called  gueio  which 
has  leaves  like  basil,  thick  and  broad  (and  it  is  called  also  another  name 
Zachon.)  They  take  the  juice  of  this  leaf  and  cut  the  nails  of  the  dead 
man  and  cut  off  the  hair  on  his  forehead,  and  they  make  powder  (of 
them)  between  two  stones,  which  they  mix  with  the  juice  of  the  afore- 
said herb,  and  they  pour  it  into  the  dead  man's  mouth  or  his  nose  and 
so  doing  they  ask  the  dead  man  if  the  physician  was  the  cause  of  his 
death,  and  if  he  had  followed  the  regimen  (or  diet).  And  they  ask  him 
this  several  times  until  he  speaks  as  plainly  as  if  he  were  alive,  so  that 
he  answers  all  that  they  ask  of  him,  saying  that  the  Buhuitihu  (Bohuti) 
did  not  follow  the  regimen,  or  was  the  cause  of  his  death  that  time. 
And  they  say  the  physician  asks  him  if  he  is  alive  or  how  it  is  that  he 
speaks  so  plainly;  and  he  answers  that  he  is  dead.  And  when  they 
have  learned  what  they  want,  they  return  him  to  his  grave  from  which 
they  took  him  to  learn  from  him  what  we  have  described.  They  also 
proceed  in  another  way  to  learn  what  they  want.  They  take  the  dead 
man  and  build  a  big  fire,  like  that  with  which  a  charcoal-burner  makes 
charcoal,  and  when  the  wood  is  become  live  coals  they  place  the  body 
into  this  great  fiery  mass  and  then  cover  it  with  earth  as  the  charcoal- 
burner  covers  charcoal  and  here  they  let  it  lie  as  long  as  they  please.  And 
as  it  lies  there  they  ask  him  questions  as  has  already  been  said  of  the 
other  method.  And  he  replies  that  he  knows  nothing  and  they  ask 
him  this  ten  times  and  then  he  speaks  no  more.  They  ask  him  if  he  is 
dead;  but  he  does  not  speak  more  than  these  ten  times. 

CHAPTER  XVIII. 

How  the  relatives  of  the  dead  man  take  vengeance  when 
they  have  received  an  answer  by  means  of  the  drench. 

The  relatives  of  the  dead  man  get  together  some  day  and  wait  for  the 
Buhuitihu  (Bohuti)  and  beat  him  with  clubs  till  they  break  his  legs, 
his  arms  and  his  head  so  that  they  fairly  bray  him  as  in  a  mortar,  and 
they  leave  him  in  that  condition  believing  that  they  have  killed  him. 
And  they  say  that  by  night  there  come  many  snakes  of  different  kinds 
which  lick  the  face  and  the  whole  body  of  this  physician  who  has  been 


23 


left  for  dead  as  we  said  and  who  remains  so  for  two  or  three  days.  And 
while  he  stays  there  in  that  condition  they  say  that  the  bones  of  his 
legs  and  arms  unite  and  knit  together  and  he  gets  up  and  walks  leisurely 
in  the  direction  of  his  cabin.  And  those  that  see  him  ask  him  saying: 
"Were  you  not  dead?"  and  he  answers  that  the  cemis  came  to  his  assist- 
ance in  the  form  of  snakes.  And  the  relatives  of  the  dead  man,  greatly 
enraged,  because  they  thought  they  had  avenged  the  death  of  their 
relative,  seeing  him  alive  grow  desperate  and  try  to  lay  hands  on  him 
to  put  him  to  death;  and  if  they  get  hold  of  him  again  they  gouge  out 
his  eyes  and  crush  his  testicles,  because  they  say  that  none  of  these 
can  die  no  matter  how  much  he  is  beaten  if  they  do  not  take  away  his 
testicles. 

How  they  learn  what  they  want  from  him  they  burn  and 
how  they  take  vengeance. 

When  they  uncover  the  fire  the  smoke  that  comes  from  it  rises  till 
they  lose  sight  of  it,  and  it  gives  forth  a  shrill  cry  as  it  comes  from  the 
furnace,  then  turns  down  and  enters  the  cabin  of  the  Buhuitihu,  (Bohuti) 
or  physician,  and  that  very  moment  he  falls  sick  if  he  did  not  follow  the 
diet  (or  regimen)  and  he  is  covered  with  sores  and  his  whole  body  peels, 
and  thus  they  have  a  sign  that  such  a  one  did  not  observe  the  diet  and 
that  therefore  the  sick  man  died.  Wherefore  they  try  to  kill  him  as  has 
been  described  in  the  case  of  the  other. 

These  then  are  the  spells  which  they  are  wont  to  use. 

CHAPTER  XIX. 

How  they  make  and  keep  cemis  of  wood  and  stone. 

Those  of  stone  (wood?)  are  made  in  this  fashion.  When  someone  is 
going  along  on  a  journey  he  says  he  sees  a  tree  which  is  moving  its  roots; 
and  the  man  in  a  great  fright  stops  and  asks:  "Who  is  it?"  And  he  replies 
"My  name  is  Buhuitihu,*  and  he  will  tell  you  who  I  am."  And  the  man 
goes  to  the  physician  and  tells  him  what  he  has  seen;  and  the  enchanter 
or  wizard  runs  immediately  to  see  the  tree  which  the  man  has  told  him 
of  and  sits  down  by  it,  and  he  makes  cogioba  as  we  have  described  above  in 
the  story  of  the  four.f  And  when  the  cogioba  is  made  he  stands  up  on 
his  feet  and  gives  it  all  its  titles  as  if  it  were  some  great  lord,  and  he 
asks  it:  "Tell  me  who  you  are  and  what  you  are  doing  here  and  what 
you  want  of  me  and  why  you  have  had  me  called.  Tell  me  if  you  want 
me  to  cut  you  or  if  you  want  to  come  with  me,  and  how  you  want  me  to 
carry  you,  and  I  will  build  you  a  cabin  and  add  a  property  to  it."  Then 


♦The  text  is  erroneous.  It  should  be  "Call  the  Bohuti"  as  appears  from  Las 
Casas's  quotation  of  the  same  passage  Docs.  Ined.  LXVI,  436. 

tSee  above  ch.  xi.  Las  Casas  describes  in  detail  the  process  of  "making  cohoba" 
which  he  says  he  had  seen  many  times.    Docs.  lndd.  LXVI,  469-71. 


24 


that  tree  or  cemi  becomes  an  idol  or  devil,  replies  to  him  telling  him  the 
shape  in  which  it  wants  to  be  made.  And  he  cuts  and  makes  it  in  the 
shape  it  has  directed;  builds  its  house  for  it,  and  gives  the  property 
and  many  times  in  the  year  makes  cogioba  for  it.  This  cogioba  is  to  pray 
to  it  and  to  please  it  and  to  ask  and  to  learn  some  things  from  the  cemi, 
either  evil  or  good,  and  in  addition  to  ask  it  for  wealth.  And  when 
they  want  to  know  if  they  will  be  victorious  over  their  enemies  they 
go  into  a  cabin  into  which  no  one  else  goes  except  the  principal  men; 
and  their  chief  is  the  first  who  begins  to  make  cogioba,  and  to  make  a 
noise;  and  while  he  is  making  cogioba,  no  one  of  them  who  is  in  the 
company  says  anything  till  the  chief  has  finished;  but  when  he  has 
finished  his  prayer,  he  stands  a  while  with  his  head  turned  (down)  and 
his  arms  on  his  knees;  then  he  lifts  his  head  up  and  looks  toward  the 
sky  and  speaks.  Then  they  all  answer  him  with  a  loud  voice,  and  when 
they  have  all  spoken  giving  thanks,  he  tells  the  vision  that  he  has  seen 
intoxicated  with  the  cogioba  which  he  has  inhaled  through  his  nose, 
which  goes  up  into  his  head.  And  he  says  that  he  has  talked  with  the 
cemi  and  that  they  are  to  have  a  victory;  or  that  his  enemies  will  fly; 
or  that  there  shall  be  a  great  loss  of  life,  or  wars  or  famine  or  some  other 
such  things  which  occur  to  him  who  is  intoxicated  to  say.  Consider 
what  a  state  their  brains  are  in,  because  they  say  the  cabins  seem  to  them 
to  be  turned  upside  down  and  that  men  are  walking  with  their  feet  in 
the  air. 

And  this  cogioba  they  make  for  cemis  of  stone  and  of  wood  as  well 
as  for  the  dead  as  we  have  described  above. 

The  stone  cemis  are  of  several  kinds.  There  are  some  which  they 
say  the  physicians  draw  from  the  body  and  the  sick  believe  these  are 
the  best  to  help  women  with  child  to  be  delivered.  There  are  others 
that  speak  which  are  shaped  like  a  large  turnip  with  the  leaves  spread 
on  and  as  long  as  caper  bushes.  These  leaves  generally  are  shaped 
like  an  elm  leaf;  others  have  three  points,  and  they  believe  that  they 
make  the  Giuca  (Yucca?)  to  grow.  Their  roots  are  like  a  radish.  The 
leaf  of  the  giutola  for  the  most  part  has  six  or  seven  points.  I  do  not 
know  with  what  to  compare  it  because  I  have  never  seen  anything  like 
it  in  Spain  or  in  other  countries.  The  stalk  of  the  giuca  is  as  tall  as  a 
man.  Let  us  now  speak  of  their  belief  relating  to  the  idols  and  cemis 
and  of  their  great  delusions  derived  from  them. 

CHAPTER  XX. 

Of  the  Cemi,  Bugia  and  Aiba,*  of  which  they  relate  that  when  there 
were  wars  he  was  burnt  by  them  and  then  washing  him  with  the  juice 
of  the  giuca  his  arms  grew  again  and  his  eyes  were  made  anew  and  his 
body  grew  again. 

The  giuca  was  small  and  with  water  and  with  juice  as  mentioned  above 
they  washed  it  in  order  that  it  should  become  big.    And  they  say  that 


♦Alternate  names  of  Baidrama  mentioned  just  below. 


25 


it  made  those  ill  who  had  made  this  cemi  because  they  did  not  bring  it 
giuca  to  eat.  This  cemi  was  named  Baidrama;*  and  when  some  one 
was  sick  they  called  the  Buhuitihu  (Bohuti)  and  asked  him  whence 
came  this  illness;  and  he  replied  that  Baidrama  had  sent  it  because 
they  had  not  sent  him  (something)  to  eat  by  those  who  had  charge  of 
his  cabin.  This  the  Buhuitihu  (Bohuti)  said  the  cemi  Baidrama  had 
told  him. 

CHAPTER  XXI. 
Of  the  cemi  of  Guamorete. 

They  say  that  when  they  built  the  house  of  Guamorete  who  was 
a  principal  man,  they  put  there  a  cemi  that  he  had  on  top  of  his  house. 
This  cemi  was  called  Corocote;  and  once  when  they  had  wars,  the  enemies 
of  Guamorete  burned  the  house  where  this  cemi  Corocote  was.  At 
that  time  they  relate  that  he  rose  up  and  went  away  a  cross-bowshot 
from  that  place  to  near  a  water.  And  they  say  that  when  he  was  above 
the  house  by  night  he  came  down  and  lay  with  the  women,  and  that 
then  Guamorete  died,  and  that  this  cemi  came  into  the  hands  of  another 
cacique  and  that  he  continued  to  lie  with  the  women.  And  they  say, 
besides,  that  two  crowns  grew  on  his  head.  Wherefore  they  said:  (of 
some  one)  "Since  he  has  two  crowns,  certainly  he  is  the  son  of  Corocote. " 
This  they  believed  very  positively.  This  cemi  came  into  the  possession 
later  of  another  cacique  named  Guatabanex  and  his  place  was  named 
Giacaba. 

CHAPTER  XXII. 

Of  another  cemi  whose  name  was  Opigielguoiran,f  and  a  principal 
man  had  him  whose  name  was  Cauauaniouaua,and  he  had  many  subjects. 

This  cemi  Opigielguouiran,  they  say,  had  four  feet  like  a  dog's,  and 
he  was  of  wood,  and  that  oftentimes  by  night  he  went  out  of  the  house 
into  the  woods  whither  they  went  to  seek  him,  and  when  he  was  brought 
back  to  the  house  they  bound  him  with  cords;  but  he  went  away  again 
to  the  woods. 

And  when  the  Christians  came  to  this  island  of  Espanola  they  say 
that  he  broke  away  and  went  into  a  swamp  and  that  they  followed 
his  tracks  but  never  saw  him  nor  do  they  [know  ^anything  about  him. 
I  deliver  this  just  as  I  received  it. 


*Las  Casas,  LXVI,  471,  gives  this  name  as  Vaybrama.  His  version  of  the  story 
is  clearer  than  the  Italian  text  of  Ramon  Pane. 

fEpileguanita  in  Peter  Martyr.  Accepted  by  Bachiller  y  Morales  as  undoubtedly 
the  proper  form,  the  name  in  the  text  being  obviously  corrupted. 


26 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 
Of  another  cemi  called  Guabancex. 

This  cemi  Guabancex  was  in  the  country  of  a  great  cacique,  one  of 
the  chief  ones,  named  Aumatex.  This  cemi  is  a  woman  and  they 
say  there  are  two  others  in  her  company.  One  is  a  crier,  the  other 
the  gatherer  or  governor  of  the  waters.  And  when  Guabancex  is  angry, 
they  say,  that  she  raises  the  wind  and  brings  rain,  and  throws  down 
houses  and  shakes  the  trees.  This  cemi  they  say  is  a  woman  and  was 
made  of  stone  of  that  country.  The  other  two  cemis  that  are  with  her 
are  named,  the  one  Guatauua,  and  is  a  crier  or  proclaimer  and  by  order 
of  Guabancex  makes  proclamation  that  all  the  other  cemis  of  that 
province  shall  help  raise  a  high  wind  and  bring  a  heavy  rain.  The  other 
is  named  Coatrischie  who,  they  relate,  gathers  the  water  into  the  valleys 
between  the  mountains  and  then  lets  them  loose  to  destroy  the  country 
This  they  are  positive  about. 

CHAPTER  XXIV. 

Of  what  they  believe  about  another  cemi  named  Faraguuaol.*  This 
cemi  belongs  to  a  principal  cacique  in  the  island  of  Espafiola,  and  is  an 
idol,  and  they  ascribe  to  him  several  names  and  he  was  found  as  you 
will  now  hear. 

They  say  that  one  day  in  the  past  before  the  island  was  discovered 
they  know  not  how  long  ago,  when  going  hunting  they  found  a  certain 
animal  and  they  ran  after  it  and  it  broke  away  into  a  ditch.  And 
looking  for  it  they  saw  a  beam  which  seems  alive.  Thereupon  the 
hunter,  seeing  it,  ran  to  his  lord  who  was  a  cicique  and  the  father  of 
Guaraionel  and  told  him  what  he  had  seen.  They  went  there  and  foimd 
the  thing  as  the  hunter  had  said.  And  they  took  the  log  and  built  a 
house  for  it.  And  they  say  that  it  went  out  of  the  house  several  times 
and  went  to  the  place  whence  they  had  brought  it,  not  exactly  to  the 
same  place  but  near  there;  because  the  lord  just  mentioned  or  his  son 
Guaraionel  sent  out  to  seek  it  they  found  it  hidden;  and  that  another 
time  they  bound  it  and  put  it  in  a  sack,  and  notwithstanding  it  was 
bound  in  this  way  it  went  off  as  before.  And  this  (story)  this  ignorant 
people  accept  as  a  positive  certainty. 

CHAPTER  XXV. 

Of  the  things  which  they  say  were  uttered  by  two  of  the  leading 
caciques  of  the  island  of  Espafiola;  the  one  named  Cazziuaquel,  father 
of  the  above-mentioned  Guarionel;  the  other  Gamanacoel. 


*Bachiller  y  Morales  thinks  this  name  should  be  written  Taragabaol. 


27 


And  (to)  that  great  lord  who  they  say  is  in  heaven,  as  in  the  beginning 
of  the  book  is  written,  (they  say  of)  this  Caizzihu,*  that  he  there  made 
a  fast  which  all  of  them  keep  together,  for  they  are  shut  up  six  or  seven 
days  without  eating  anything  except  the  juice  of  herbs  with  which 
they  also  wash  themselves.  After  this  time  is  finished,  they  begin  to 
eat  something  which  gives  them  nourishment.  And  in  the  time  that 
they  have  been  without  food  through  the  weakness  which  they  feel  in 
the  body  and  in  the  head  they  say  they  have  seen  something  perhaps 
desired  by  them,  for  they  all  keep  this  fast  in  honor  of  the  cemi  that 
they  have  in  order  to  know  if  they  will  obtain  a  victory  over  their  ene- 
mies or  to  acquire  wealth  or  for  anything  else  they  desire.  And  they 
say  that  this  cacique  affirmed  that  he  had  spoken  with  Giocauuaghamat 
who  had  told  him  that  whoever  remained  alive  after  his  death  should 
enjoy  the  rule  over  them  only  a  short  time,  because  they  would  see 
in  their  country  a  people  clothed  which  was  to  rule  them  and  to  slay 
them  and  that  they  would  die  of  hunger.  At  first  they  thought  these 
would  be  the  Canibales;J  but  reflecting  that  they  only  plundered  and 
fled  they  believed  that  it  must  be  another  people  that  the  cemi  spoke 
of.  Wherefore  they  now  believe  that  it  was  the  Admiral  and  the  people 
he  brought  with  him.  §  Now  I  want  to  tell  what  I  have  seen  and  what 
took  place,  when  I  and  the  other  friars  went  to  Castile  and  I,  Friar 
Ramon  a  poor  hermit  stayed  behind  ||  and  went  off  to  the  Magdalena  to 
a  fort  which  Don  Christopher  Columbus,  Admiral,  viceroy  and  governor 
of  the  islands  and  of  the  main  land  of  the  Indies  by  command  of  King 
Don  Ferdinand  and  of  the  Queen  Donna  Isabella.  I  being  in  that  fort 
with  Artiaga  (Arriaga)  appointed  captain  of  it  by  order  of  the  aforesaid 
viceroy  Don  Christopher  Columbus  it  pleased  God  to  enlighten  with  the 
light  of  the  Holy  Catholic  Faith  a  whole  household  of  the  principal 
people  of  that  province  of  Magdalena.  This  province  was  called  Maro- 
risll  and  the  lord  of  it  was  called  Guauauoconel,  which  means  son  of 
Guauaenechin.  In  the  aforesaid  house  were  his  servants  and  favorites 
who  had  for  a  surname  Giahuuauariu.  They  were  in  all  sixteen  persons 
all  relatives,  and  among  them  five  brothers.  Of  these  one  died,  and  the 
other  four  received  the  water  of  holy  baptism.  And  I  believe  that 
they  died  martyrs,  for  so  it  appeared  in  their  death  and  in  their  constancy. 
The  first  who  received  the  death  or  the  water  of  holy  baptism  was  an 
Indian  called  Guaticaua**  who  then  received  the  name  of  John.  This 

*This  sentence  is  apparently  corrupt.  The  conjectural  insertions  are  based  on 
Las  Casas's  epitome  of  the  same  story.  Docs.  Ined.  LXVI,  473.  I  take  Caizziuaquel 
and  Caizzihu  to  be  the  same. 

fYocahuguama  in  Las  Casas,  op.  tit.  475. 

f'That  people  whom  we  now  call  Caribes  but  whom  they  then  and  we  called  Cani- 
bales"  Las  Casas  op.  cit.  475.    The  words  are  etymologically  the  same. 

§A  very  interesting  legend  of  a  prophecy  of  a  clothed  conquering  race.  Possibly 
the  attribute  of  clothing  may  have  been  based  on  rumors  of  the  Mayas  or  the  Aztecs. 

||The  text  is  confused.  Probably  it  means  simply  at  the  time  when  the  other 
friars  went  to  Castile. 

ITMasorix.    Las  Casas,  Docs.  Indd.  LXVI,  436. 

**Guaicauanu  is  the  form  given  a  page  below. 


28 


was  the  first  Christian  who  suffered  a  cruel  death;  and  surely  it  seems 
to  me  that  he  died  the  death  of  a  martyr.  For  I  have  heard  from  some 
who  were  present  at  his  death  that  he  said  Dio  Aboriadacha,  Dio  Aboria- 
dacha,* which  is  to  say:  "I  am  a  servant  of  God."  And  in  like  manner 
died  his  brother  Antony  and  with  him  another  saying  the  same  thing. 
All  those  of  this  household  and  people  attended  me  to  do  whatever  I 
pleased.  Those  that  were  left  alive  and  are  living  to-day  are  Christians 
through  the  means  of  Don  Christopher  Columbus,  viceroy  and  governor 
of  the  Indies;  and  now  the  Christians  are  many  more  in  number  through 
the  grace  of  God. 

Let  us  now  relate  what  befel  us  in  the  island  (province)  of  Magdalena. 
When  I  was  there  in  Magdalena  the  said  Lord  Admiral  came  to  the  assist- 
ance of  Arriaga  and  some  Christians  who  were  besieged  by  enemies, 
the  subjects  of  a  principal  cacique  named  Caouabo  (Caonabo).  The 
Lord  Admiral  told  me  that  the  language  of  the  province  Magdalena 
Maroris  (Macorix)  was  different  from  the  other,  and  that  the  speech 
there  was  not  understood  throughout  the  land,  and  that  therefore  I 
should  go  and  reside  with  another  principal  Cacique  named  Guarionex, 
lord  of  a  numerous  people  whose  language  was  understood  everywhere 
in  the  land.  So  by  his  command  I  went  to  reside  with  the  said  Guarionex. 
It  is  true,  that  I  said  to  the  lord  governor  Don  Christopher  Columbus: 
"My  lord,  why  does  your  lordship  wish  me  to  go  and  live  with  Guarionex 
when  I  know  no  language  besides  that  of  Maroris?  (Magorix)  Let 
your  lordship  permit  that  some  one  of  these  people  of  Nuhuirci,  who 
then  were  Christians  and  knew  both  languages,  go  with  me."  This 
he  granted  me  and  told  me  to  take  whomever  I  pleased.  And  God  in 
his  goodness  gave  me  for  a  companion  the  best  of  the  Indians  and  the 
one  most  experienced  in  the  Christian  faith.  Later  he  took  him  from 
me.  God  be  praised  who  gave  him  and  took  him  away,  whom  I  truly 
regarded  as  a  good  son  and  a  brother.  And  he  was  that  Guaicauanu 
who  afterwards  was  a  Christian  and  was  called  John. 

Of  what  befell  us  there  I,  the  poor  hermit,  shall  not  relate  anything, 
nor  how  we  set  forth  Guaicauanu  and  I  and  went  to  Isabella  and  waited 
for  the  Admiral  till  he  returned  from  the  relief  of  Magdalena.  As  soon 
as  he  arrived  we  we  nt  where  the  lord  governor  had  ordered  us  in  company 
with  one  Juan  de  Agiada  (Aguada)  who  had  charge  of  a  fort  which  the 
said  governor  Don  Christopher  Columbus  had  built,  half  a  league  from 
the  place  where  we  were  to  live.  And  the  aforesaid  lord  Admiral  com- 
manded the  said  Juan  di  Agiada  (Aguada)  that  he  should  give  us  to  eat 
from  the  store  that  was  in  the  fort.  This  fort  was  called  Conception. 
We  then  were  with  that  cacique  Guarionex  almost  two  years  giving 
him  instruction  all  the  time  in  our  holy  faith  and  the  customs  of  Chris- 
tians. In  the  beginning  he  showed  a  good  will  and  gave  us  hopes  that 
he  would  do  everything  we  wished  and  of  desiring  to  be  a  Christian  f 
asking  us  to  teach  him  the  Lord's  Prayer,  the  Ave  Maria  and  the  Creed 


♦This  phrase  one  the  very  few  extant  belonging  to  the  Taino  or  Haytian  language 
is  given  by  Las  Casas  as  "Dios  naboria  daca."  op.  cit.  475. 


29 


and  all  the  other  prayers  which  pertain  to  the  Christian.  And  thus 
he  learned  the  Lord's  Prayer  and  the  Ave  Maria,  and  the  Creed.  And 
many  of  his  household  learned  the  same.  And  every  morning  he  said  his 
prayers  and  he  made  his  household  say  them  twice  a  day.  But  later 
he  became  offended  and  gave  up  that  good  plan  through  the  fault  of 
some  other  principal  men  of  that  country,  who  blamed  him  because  he 
was  willing  to  give  heed  to  the  Christian  law,  since  the  Christians  were 
bad  men  and  got  possession  of  their  lands  by  force.  Therefore  they 
advised  him  to  care  no  more  for  anything  belonging  to  the  Christians, 
but  that  they  should  agree  and  conspire  together  to  slay  them,  because 
they  could  not  satisfy  them  and  were  resolved  not  to  try  in  any  fashion 
to  follow  their  ways.  For  this  reason  he  broke  off  from  his  good  intention, 
and  we,  seeing  that  he  had  broken  away  and  left  what  we  had  taught 
him,  resolved  to  depart  thence  and  go  where  we  might  be  more  successful 
in  teaching  the  Indians  and  instructing  them  in  the  matters  of  our  faith. 
And  so  we  went  to  another  principal  cacique  who  showed  us  good  will 
saying  that  he  wished  to  be  a  Christian.  This  cacique  was  called  Mauiatue . 
Accordingly,  we  set  out  to  go  to  the  said  Mauiatue's  country:  I  Friar 
Ramon  Pane,  a  poor  hermit,  and  Friar  Juan  Borgognone  of  the  order 
of  St.  Francis  and  John  Matthew  the  first  that  received  the  water  of  Holy 
Baptism  in  the  island  of  Espanola. 

On  the  second  day  after  we  departed  from  the  village  and  habitation 
of  Guarionex  to  go  to  the  other  cacique  named  Mauiatue  the  people 
of  Guarionex  built  a  house  near  the  house  of  prayer  in  which  we  left 
some  images  before  which  the  catechumens  were  to  kneel  and  pray  and 
to  console  themselves.  And  they  were  the  mother,  and  brothers  and  the 
relatives  of  the  aforesaid  John  Matthew,  the  first  Christian.  Later 
seven  others  joined  them  and  then  all  of  that  family  became  Christians 
and  persevered  in  their  good  intentions,  according  to  our  faith;  so  that 
all  that  family  remained  as  the  guardians  of  that  house  of  prayer  and 
some  lands  that  I  had  had  tilled. 

Now  these  being  left  to  guard  this  house  the  second  day  after  we  had 
gone  to  the  aforesaid  Mauiatue,  six  men  went  into  the  house  of  prayer 
which  the  aforesaid  catechumens  who  were  seven  in  number  had  charge 
of,  and  by  order  of  Guarionex  told  them  that  they  should  take  those 
images  which  Friar  Ramon  had  left  in  the  custody  of  the  catechumens, 
and  rend  them  and  break  them  in  pieces,  since  Friar  Ramon  and  his 
companions  had  gone  and  they  would  not  know  who  did  it.  Therefore 
these  six  servants  of  Guarionex  went  there  and  found  six  boys  watching 
over  this  house  of  prayer  fearing  what  happened  later;  and  the  boys 
thus  instructed  said  they  were  unwilling  they  should  come  in,  but  they 
forced  their  way  in  and  took  the  images  and  carried  them  off. 


30 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 

What  became  of  the  images  and  the  miracle  God  wrought 
to  show  his  power. 

When  they  came  out  of  the  house  of  prayer,  they  threw  the  images 
down  on  the  ground  and  covered  them  with  dirt  and  then  made 
water  upon  them  saying:  "Now  your  fruits  will  be  good  and  great." 
And  this  because  they  buried  them  in  a  tilled  field  saying  that  the  fruit 
would  be  good  which  was  planted  there,  and  this  all  in  mockery.  And 
when  the  boys  saw  this  that  had  charge  of  the  house  of  prayer  by  com- 
mand of  the  catechumens  they  ran  to  their  elders  who  were  on  their 
lands  and  told  them,  that  the  men  of  Guarionex  had  torn  the  images 
to  tatters  and  mocked  them.  And  when  they  understood  the  matter 
from  them  they  left  their  work  and  ran  crying  out  to  give  an  account 
of  it  to  Don  Bartholomew  Columbus  who  was  then  governor  in  place  of  the 
Admiral  his  brother,  who  had  gone  to  Castile.  He  as  lieutenant  of  the 
viceroy  and  governor  of  the  islands  had  the  offenders  tried  and  the  truth 
being  made  known  he  had  them  publicly  burnt.  All  this  did  not  deter 
Guarionex  and  his  subjects  from  the  evil  design  they  had  of  slaying 
the  Christians  on  the  day  appointed  for  bringing  in  the  tribute  which 
they  payed.*  But  their  conspiracy  was  discovered,  and  thus  they 
were  taken  on  the  same  day  on  which  they  were  going  to  carry  it  into 
effect.  Still  they  persisted  in  their  plan  and  putting  it  into  operation, 
they  killed  four  men  and  John  Matthew  chief  clerk  and  Anthony  his 
brother  who  had  received  Holy  Baptism.  And  they  ran  to  where  they 
had  hidden  the  images  and  tore  them  in  pieces.  Some  days  later  the 
owner  of  that  field  went  to  dig  agis  which  are  roots  like  turnips  and  some 
like  radishes.  And  in  the  place  where  the  images  had  been  buried 
two  or  three  agis  had  grown  one  through  the  middle  of  the  other  in  the 
form  of  a  cross.  Nor  was  it  possible  for  any  man  to  find  this  cross,  but 
the  mother  of  Guarionex  found  it  who  was  the  worst  woman  I  knew 
in  those  parts.  She  thought  this  a  great  miracle  and  said  to  the  com- 
mander of  the  fort  Conception,  "This  miracle  has  been  shown  by  God 
where  the  images  were  found.    God  knows  why." 

Let  us  now  relate  how  the  first  Christians  were  converted  who  received 
Holy  Baptism  and  how  much  it  is  necessary  to  do  to  make  all  Christians. 
And  truly  the  island  has  great  need  of  people  to  punish  the  chiefs  when 
they  will  not  suffer  their  people  to  hear  the  things  of  the  Holy  Catholic 
Faith,  and  to  be  taught  in  it,  because  they  are  not  able  and  do  not 
know  how  to  speak  against  it.  I  can  affirm  this  with  truth  because  it 
has  cost  me  much  labor  to  know  it  and  I  am  certain  that  it  will  be  clear 
from  what  we  have  said  of  this  to  point.    A  word  to  the  wise  is  enough. 

The  first  Christians  then  in  the  island  of  Espanola  were  those  of  whom 
we  have  spoken  above,  i.  e.  Gianauuariu  in  whose  family  there  were 


*Cf.    Las  Casas,  Historia  de  las  Indias  II,  144-5. 


31 


seventeen  persons  who  all  became  Christians,  as  soon  as  they  understood 
that  there  is  one  God  who  has  made  all  things  and  created  heaven  and 
earth,  without  any  further  arguments  or  controversy  because  they 
easily  believe.  But  with  others  both  force  and  intelligence  must  be  used, 
because  they  are  not  all  alike.  Because  if  these  had  a  good  beginning 
and  a  better  end  there  will  be  others  who  will  begin  well  and  then  will 
laugh  at  what  has  been  taught  them.  For  such  force  and  punishment 
are  necessary. 

The  first  that  received  Holy  Baptism  in  the  island  of  Espafiola  was 
John  Matthew  who  was  baptized  on  the  day  of  St.  Matthew  the  Evan- 
gelist (September  21)  in  the  year  1496,  and  later  all  his  family;  where 
there  have  been  many  Christians  and  there  would  be  more  if  there  had 
been  someone  to  teach  them  and  to  instruct  them  in  the  Holy  Catholic 
Faith  and  people  to  hold  them  in  check. 

And  if  any  one  should  ask  why  I  make  this  so  easy  a  matter  I  say 
it  is  because  I  have  seen  the  experiment  tried  especially  in  the  case  of 
a  principal  cacique  Mahuuiatiuire  who  has  continued  now  for  three 
years  in  his  good  purpose  saying  that  he  will  be  a  Christian  and  have 
but  one  wife  because  they  used  to  have  two  or  three  and  the  principal 
ones  ten,  fifteen  or  twenty. 

This  is  what  I  have  been  able  to  understand  and  to  learn  as  to  the  cus- 
toms and  ceremonies  of  the  Indians  of  Espafiola,  with  all  the  pains  I 
have  taken  wherein  I  expect  no  spiritual  or  temporal  advantage. 

May  it  please  our  Lord  if  this  is  useful  to  his  government  and  service 
to  give  me  his  grace  to  persevere;  and  if  it  must  fall  out  otherwise,  may 
he  take  away  my  understanding. 

The  end  of  the  work  of  the  poor  hermit  Ramon  Pane.* 


AN  EPITOME  OF  THE  TREATISE  OF  FRIAR  RAMON 
INSERTED  BY  PETER  MARTYR  IN  HIS 
BE  REBUS  OCEANICIS  ET  NOVO  ORBE. 

DECADE  I.     LIB.  IX. 

INTRODUCTORY  NOTE. 

The  translation  is  that  of  Richard  Eden,  as  revised  by  Michael  Lok, 
and  published  in  Hakluyt's  Voyages,  London  ed.  1812.  Vol.  v.  209ff. 
I  have  compared  the  translation  with  the  original,  restoring  some 
slight  omissions  and  correcting  some  errors.  E.  G.  B. 

Our  men  therefore  were  long  in  the  Hand  of  Hispaniola, 
before  they  knew  that  the  people  thereof  honoured  any- 
other  thing  then  the  lightes  of  heauen,  or  hadde  any  other 


*Historie.    Ed.  1571,  folios  126-145. 


32 


religion :  but  when  they  hadde  beene  longe  conuersaunt  with 
them,  and  by  vnderstanding  their  language,  drew  to  a  further 
familiaritie,  they  had  knowledge  that  they  vsed  diuers  rites 
and  superstitions:  I  haue  therefore  gathered  these  fewe 
thinges  following,  omitting  the  more  trifling  matter,  out  of  a 
booke  written  by  one  Ramonus  [Ramon]  an  Heremite,  whome 
Colonus  [Columbus]  hadde  left  with  certayne  kinges  of  the 
Ilande  to  instruct  them  in  the  Christian  faith.  And  tarry- 
ing there  a  long  time  he  composed  a  small  book  in  the 
Spanish  tongue  on  the  rites  of  the  island.  And  because  in 
manner  their  whole  religion  is  none  other  thing  then  idola- 
trie,  I  will  beegin  at  their  idolles.  It  is  therefore  apparant 
by  the  images  which  they  honour  openly  and  commonly  f 
that  there  appeare  vnto  them  in  the  night  seasons,  certayne 
phantasies  and  illusions  of  euil  spirites,  seducing  them  into 
many  fonde  and  foolish  errours  for  they  make  certaine 
images  of  Gossampine  cotton,  folded  or  wreathed  after 
their  manner,  and  hard  stopped  within.  These  images 
they  make  sitting,  muche  like  vnto  the  pictures  of  spirits 
and  deuilles  which  our  paynters  are  accustomed  to  paynt 
vpon  walles:  but  forasmuch  as  I  my  selfe  sent  you  foure 
of  these  Images,  you  may  better  presently  signifie  vnto 
the  king  vour  vncle,  what  manner  of  things  they  are,  and 
howe  like  vnto  paynted  deuilles,  than  I  can  expresse  the 
same  by  writing.  These  images,  the  inhabitauntes  call 
Zemes,  whereof  the  leaste,  made  to  the  likenesse  of  young 
deuilles,  they  binde  to  their  foreheades  when  they  goe  to 
the  warres  against  their  enemies,  and  for  that  purpose  haue 
they  those  strings  hanging  at  them  which  you  see.  Of 
these,  they  beleeue  to  obteyne  rayne,  if  raine  bee  lacking, 
likewise  fayre  weather  if  they  are  in  need  of  sunshine:  for 
they  think  that  these  Zemes  are  the  mediatours  and  messen- 
gers of  the  great  God,  whom  they  acknowledge  to  be  onely 
one,  eternall,  without  end,  omnipotent,  and  inuisible.  Thus 
euery  king  hath  his  particular  Zeme,  which  he  honoureth. 
They  call  the  eternall  God  by  these  two  names,  Iocauna, 


38 


Guamaonocon,  as  their  predecessoures  taught  them,  affirm- 
ing that  hee  hath  a  mother  called  by  these  flue  names: 
that  is,  Attabeira,  Mamona,  Guacarapita,  Iiella,  Guimazoa. 
Nowe  shall  you  heare  what  they  fable  on  the  earth  as  touch- 
ing the  originall  of  man.  There  is  in  the  lande,  a  region 
called  Caunana,  where  they  faine  that  mankinde  came  first 
out  of  two  caues  of  a  mountaine :  and  that  the  biggest  sorte 
of  men  came  forth  of  the  mouth  of  the  biggest  caue,  and 
the  least  sort  out  of  the  least  caue.  The  rocke  in  the  which 
these  caues  are,  they  call  Cauta.  The  greatest  denne, 
they  name  Cazibaxagua,  and  the  lesse  Amaiauna.  They  say, 
that  before  it  was  lawful  for  men  to  come  foorth  of  the 
caue,  the  mouth  of  the  caue  was  kept  and  watched  nightly 
by  a  man  whose  name  was  Machochael:  this  Machochael, 
departing  somewhat  farre  from  the  caue,  to  the  intent  to 
see  what  things  were  abroad,  was  sodenly  taken  of  the 
sunne,  (whose  sight  he  was  forbidden)  and  was  turned 
into  a  stone.  They  fayne  the  like  of  diuers  others,  that 
whereas  they  went  forth  in  the  night  season  a  fishing  so 
farre  from  the  caue,  that  they  could  not  returne  before  the 
rising  of  the  sunne  (the  which  it  was  not  lawfull  for  them 
to  behold)  they  were  transformed  into  Myrobalane  trees, 
which  of  themselves  grow  plentifully  in  the  Hand.  They 
said  furthermore,  that  a  certayne  ruler  called  Vaguoniona, 
sent  one  foorth  of  the  caue  to  goe  a  fishing,  who  by  like 
chance  was  turned  into  a  Nightingale,  because  the  sunne 
was  risen  beef  ore  hee  came  agayne  to  the  caue:  and  that 
yeerely  about  the  same  time  that  he  was  turned  into 
a  bird,*  he  doth  in  the  night  with  a  mourning  song 
bewayle  his  misfortune,  and  call  for  the  helpe  of  his 
maister  Vaguoniona :  And  this  they  thinke  to  bee  the  cause 
why  that  bird  singe th  in  the  night  season.  But  Vaguon- 
iona, being  sore  troubled  in  his  mind  for  the  losse  of  his 
familiar  friend  whom  he  loued  so  entirely,  leauing  the  men 
in  the  caue,  brought  forth  only  the  women  with  their  suck- 


*By  a  curious  error  Lok  has  "bridge"  instead  of  "bird", 


i 


84 

ing  children;  and  leauing  the  women  in  one  of  the  Ilandes 
of  that  tract,  called  Mathinino,  he  caryed  the  children 
away  with  him;  which  poor  wretches  oppressed  with  famine, 
faynted  and  remayned  on  the  banke  of  a  certaine  ryuer, 
where  they  were  turned  into  frogges  and  cryed  toa,  toa, 
that  is  mamma,  mamma,  as  children  are  woont  to  cry,  for 
the  mothers  pape.  And  heereof  they  say  it  commeth  that 
frogges  vse  to  cry  so  pitifully  in  the  springtime  of  the  yeare : 
And  that  men  were  scattered  abroade  in  the  caues  of 
Hispaniola  without  the  companie  of  women.  They  say 
also,  that  Vaguoniona  himself  being  accustomed  to  wander 
in  diuers  places,  and  yet  by  a  speciall  grace  neuer  trans- 
formed once,  descended  to  a  certayne  faire  woman,  whom 
he  sawe  in  the  bottome  of  the  sea,  and  receiued  of  her 
certayne  pibble  stones  of  marble  (which  they  called  Cibas) 
and  also  certayne  yellowe  and  bright  plates  of  lattin  which 
they  call  Guaninos.  These  necklaces  to  this  day  are  had 
in  great  estimation  among  the  kinges,  as  goodly  jewelles 
and  most  holy  reliques. 

These*  men  which  we  said  before  were  left  in  the  caves 
without  women,  went  forth  in  the  night  (as  they  say)  to 
wash  themselves  in  a  pond  of  rain  water  and  saw  a  far  off 
by  the  way  a  great  multitude  of  certain  beasts  in  shape 
somewhat  like  unto  women,  creeping  as  thick  as  ants  about 
the  myrobalane  trees;  And  that  as  they  attempted  to 
take  these  beasts,  they  slipped  out  of  their  hands  as  they 
had  been  eels.  Whereupon  they  consulted,  and  determined 
by  the  advice  of  the  elders,  that  all  such  should  be  sought  forth 
among  them,  as  were  scabbed  and  leprous,  to  the  intent 
that  with  their  rough  and  hard  hands,  they  might  the  easier 
take  hold  of  them.  These  men,  they  call  Caracaracoles: 
And  sent  them  forth  a  hunting  to  take  their  beasts.  But 
of  many  which  they  took,  they  could  keep  but  only  four: 
and  when  they  would  have  used  them  for  women,  they  found 


*The  two  legends  that  follow  of  the  making  of  women  and  of  the  making  of  the 
sea  were  omitted  by  Lok  although  translated  by  Eden.  Eden's  version  modernized 
has  been  inserted  here. 


35 


that  they  lacked  woman's  priuities.  Wherefore  calling  the 
elders  again  to  counsel  to  consult  what  were  best  to  be  done  in 
this  case,  their  advice  was  that  the  bird  which  we  call  the 
Pye,  should  be  admitted  with  his  bill  to  open  a  place  for 
that  purpose,  while  in  the  meantime  these  men  called 
Caracaracoles,  should  hold  fast  the  women's  thighs  abroad 
with  their  rough  hands.  Full  wisely  therefore  was  the  pye 
put  to  this  office,  and  opened  the  women's  priuities,  and 
hereof  the  women  of  the  Island  have  their  origin  and  off- 
spring. But  now  do  I  cease  to  marvel  that  the  old  Greeks 
did  fable  and  write  so  many  books  of  the  people  called 
Myrmidones,  which  they  said  to  be  engendered  of  ants  or 
pismires.  These  and  such  like,  the  sagest  and  wisest  of 
the  people,  preach  continually  to  the  simple  sort,  and 
rehearse  the  same  as  most  holy  oracles.  But  it  is  yet  more 
childish  [rather,  more  sober]  that  they  fable  as  touching  the 
original  of  the  sea.  For  they  say  that  there  was  once  in 
the  Island,  a  man  of  great  power,  whose  name  was  lata; 
whose  only  son  being  dead,  he  buried  him  within  a  great 
gourd.  This  lata,  grievously  taking  the  death  of  his  son, 
after  a  few  months,  came  again  to  the  gourd:  The  which 
when  he  had  opened,  there  issued  forth  many  great  whales 
and  other  monsters  of  the  sea:  whereupon  he  declared  to 
such  as  dwelt  about  him,  that  the  sea  was  enclosed  in  that 
gourd.  By  which  report,  four  brethren  (borne  of  one  woman 
who  died  in  her  travail)  being  moved,  came  to  the  gourd  in 
hope  to  have  many  fishes.  The  which  when  they  had 
taken  in  their  hands,  and  espied  lata  coming,  (who  often- 
times resorted  to  the  gourd  to  visit  the  bones  of  his  son) 
fearing  lest  he  should  suspect  them  of  theft  and  sacrilege, 
suddenly  let  the  gourd  fall  out  of  their  hands :  which  being 
broken  in  the  fall  the  sea  forthwith  broke  out  at  the  rifts 
thereof,  and  so  filled  the  vales,  and  overflowed  the  plains, 
that  only  the  mountains  were  uncovered,  which  now  contain 
the  islands  which  are  seen  in  those  coasts.  And  this  is  the 
opinion  of  these  wise  men  as  concerning  the  origin  of  the  sea. 


36 


But  nowe  (most  noble  prince)  you  shall  heare  a  more 
pleasaunt  fable.  There  is  a  certayne  caue  called  Iouana- 
boina,  in  the  territorie  of  a  certayne  king  whose  name  is 
Machinnech:  This  caue  they  honour  more  religiously  then 
did  the  Greekes  in  time  paste,  Corinth,  Cyrrha,  or  Nysa, 
and  haue  adourned  it  with  pictures  of  a  thousand  fashions. 
In  the  intrance  of  this  caue  they  haue  two  grauen  Zemes, 
whereof  the  one  is  called  Binthaitel,  and  the  other  Mar  oh  u. 
Being  demanded  why  they  had  this  caue  in  so  great  reuerence 
they  answered  earnestly,  because  the  sunne  and  the  moone 
came  first  out  of  the  same  to  giue  light  to  the  world:  they 
haue  religious  concourse  to  these  caues,  as  we  are  accustomed 
to  goe  on  Pylgrimage  to  Rome,  or  Vaticane,  Compostella, 
or  the  Lords  Sepulchre,  Hierusalem,  as  most  holy  &  head 
places  of  our  religion.  They  are  also  subject  to  another 
kind  of  superstition:  for  they  thinke  that  dead  folks  walke 
in  the  night,  and  eate  the  fruite  called  Guannaba,  vnknowne 
vnto  vs,  &  somewhat  like  vnto  a  Quinse:  affirming  also 
that  they  are  couersant  with  liuing  people:  euen  in  their 
beddes,  and  to  deceiue  women  in  taking  vpon  them  the 
shape  of  men,  shewing  themselves  as  though  they  would 
haue  to  doe  with  them:  but  when  the  matter  commeth  to 
actuall  deed,  sodainly  they  vanishe  away.  If  any  do  suspect 
that  a  dead  body  lyeth  by  him,  when  he  feeleth  any  strange 
thing  in  the  bed,  they  say  he  shall  bee  out  of  doubt  by  feeling 
of  the  bellie  thereof;  affirming  that  the  spirites  of  dead  men 
may  take  vppon  them  all  the  members  of  mans  body,  sauing 
onely  the  nauel.  If  therefore  by  the  lacke  of  the  nauel  he 
doe  perceiue  that  a  dead  body  lyeth  by  him,  the  feeling 
(contact)  is  immediately  resolued.  (relaxed)  They  beleeue 
verily,  that  in  the  night,  and  oftentimes  in  ther  iourneies, 
and  especially  in  common  and  high  wayes,  dead  men  doe 
meete  with  the  liuing:  Against  whom,  if  any  man  bee 
stout  and  out  of  feare,  the  fantasie  vanisheth  incontinently : 
but  if  anie  feare,  the  fantasie  or  vision  dooth  so  assaulte 
him  and  strike  him  with  further  feare,  that  many  are  thereby 


37. 


astonyshed,  and  haue  the  lymmes  of  their  bodies  taken. 
(Rather,  are  completely  unnerved).  The  inhabitauntes 
beeing  demanded  of  whom  they  had  those  vaine  superstitions 
they  aunswered,  that  they  were  left  them  of  their  forefathers, 
as  by  descent  of  inheritance,  and  that  they  haue  had  the 
same  before  the  memorie  of  man,  composed  in  certaine 
rimes  and  songes,  which  it  was  lawfull  for  none  to  learne, 
but  onely  the  kinges  sonnes,  who  committed  the  same  to 
memory e  because  they  had  neuer  any  knowledge  of  letters. 
These  they  sing  before  the  people  on  certaine  solemne 
and  festiuall  dayes  as  most  religious  ceremonies:  while  in 
the  meane  time  they  play  on  a  certaine  instrument  made  of 
one  whole  peece  of  wood  somewhat  holowe  like  a  timbrel. 
Their  priestes  and  diuines  (whom  they  call  Boitii)  instructe 
them  in  these  superstitions:  These  priestes  are  also  phisi- 
tions,  deuising  a  thousand  craftes  and  subtilties  howe  to 
deceiue  the  simple  people  which  haue  them  in  great  reuerence 
for  they  perswade  them  that  the  Zemes  vse  to  speak  with 
them  familiarly,  and  tel  them  of  things  to  come.  And  if 
any  haue  ben  sicke,  and  are  recouered  they  make  and  beleeue 
that  they  obteined  their  health  of  the  Zemes.  These 
Boitii  bind  themselves  to  much  fasting,  and  outward  clean- 
linesse,  and  purginges,  especially  when  they  take  vpon  them 
the  cure  of  any  prince,  for  then  they  drinke  the  powder  of  a 
certaine  herbe  by  whose  qualitie  they  are  driuen  into  a  fury, 
at  which  time  (as  they  say)  they  learne  many  thinges  by 
reuelation  of  the  Zemes.  Then  putting  secretely  in  their 
mouthes,  eyther  a  stone,  or  a  bone,  or  a  peece  of  flesh,  they 
come  to  the  sick  person  commaunding  al  to  depart  out  of 
that  place  except  one  or  two  whom  it  shall  please  the  sicke 
man  to  appoynt:  this  done,  they  goe  about  him  three  or 
foure  times,  greatly  deforming  their  faces,  lipps,  and  nos- 
thrils  with  sundry  filthy  gestures,  blowing,  breathing,  and 
sucking  the  forehead,  temples,  and  necke  of  the  patient, 
whereby  (they  say)  they  drawe  the  euil  ayre  from  him,  and 
sucke  the  disease  out  of  the  vaynes;  then  rubbing  him, 


88 


about  the  shoulders,  thighes  and  legges,  and  drawing  downe 
their  handes  close  by  his  feete,  holding  them  yet  faste 
togeather,  they  runne  to  the  doore  being  open,  where  they 
vnclose  and  shake  their  hands,  affirming  that  they  haue 
driuen  away  the  disease,  and  that  the  patient  shall  shortly 
be  perfectly  restored  to  health.  After  this  comming  be- 
hinde  him,  hee  conueigheth  a  peece  of  fleshe  out  of  his  owne 
mouth  like  a  iuggeler,  and  sheweth  it  to  the  sicke  man, 
saying  /'Behold,  you  haue  eaten  to  much,  you  shall  nowe 
bee  whole,  because  I  haue  taken  this  from  you."  But  if  he 
entend  yet  further  to  deceiue  the  patient,  hee  perswadeth 
him  that  his  Zeme  is  angry,  eyther  because  he  hath  not 
builded  him  a  chappell,  or  not  honoured  him  religiously, 
or  not  dedicated  vnto  him  a  groue  or  garden.  And  if  it  so 
chaunce  that  the  sicke  person  die,  his  kinsfolks,  by  witch- 
crafte,  enforce  the  dead  to  confesse  whether  he  died  by 
naturall  destiny,  or  by  the  negligence  of  the  Boitius,  in 
that  he  had  not  fasted  as  he  should  haue  done,  or  not  minis- 
tred  a  conuenient  medicine  for  the  disease:  so  that  if  this 
phisition  be  found  faultie,  they  take  reuenge  of  him.  Of 
these  stones  or  bones  which  these  Boitii  cary  in  their  mouthes, 
if  the  women  can  come  by  them,  they  keepe  them  religiously, 
beleeuing  them  to  be  greatly  effectuall  to  helpe  women 
traueling  with  childe,  and  therefore  honour  them  as  they  do 
their  Zemes.  For  diuers  of  the  inhabitantes  honour  Zemes 
of  diuers  fashions:  some  make  them  of  wood,  as  they  were 
admonished  by  certaine  visions  appearing  vnto  them  in 
the  woods:  Other,  which  haue  receiued  aunswer  of  them 
among  the  rockes,  make  them  of  stone  and  marble.  Some 
they  make  of  rootes,  to  the  similitude  of  such  as  appeare  to 
them  when  they  are  gathering  the  rootes  called  Ages, 
whereof  they  make  their  bread,  as  we  haue  said  before. 
These  Zemes  they  beleue  to  send  plentie  &  fruitfulnes 
of  those  rootes,  as  the  antiquitie  beleued  such  fayries  or 
spirits  as  they  called  Dryades,  Hamadryades,  Satyros, 
Panes,  and  Nereides,  to  haue  the  cure  &  prouidence  of 


39 


the  sea,  woods,  springes,  and  fountaines,  assigning  to  euery 
thing  their  peculiar  goddes;  Euen  so  doe  the  inhabitants  of 
this  Hand  attribute  a  Zeme  to  euery  thing,  supposing  the 
same  to  giue  eare  to  their  inuocations.  Wherefore,  as 
often  as  the  kings  aske  counsell  of  their  Zemes  as  concern- 
ing their  warres,  increase  of  fruites  or  scarcenes,  or  health 
&  sickness,  they  enter  into  the  house  dedicate  to  their 
Zemes,  where,  snuffing  vp  into  their  nosthryles  the  pouder 
of  the  herbe  called  Cohobba*  (wherewith  the  Boitii  are  dry- 
uen  into  a  furie)  they  say  that  immediately  they  see  the 
houses  turned  topsie  turuie,  and  men  to  walke  with  their 
heeles  vpward,  of  such  force  is  this  pouder,  vtterly  to  take 
away  al  sence.  As  soone  as  this  madnesse  ceasseth,  he 
embraceth  his  knees  with  his  armes,  holding  downe  his 
head.  And  when  he  hath  remayned  thus  awhile  astony- 
shed,  hee  lifteth  vp  his  head,  as  one  that  came  newe  out  of 
sleepe :  and  thus  lookin  vp  toward  heauen,  first  he  fumbleth 
certaine  confounded  wordes  with  himselfe,  then  certayne 
of  the  nobilitie  or  chief e  gentlemen  that  are  about  him  (for 
none  of  the  common  people  are  admitted  to  these  mysteries) 
with  loude  voyces  giue  tokens  of  reioicing  that  hee  is  returned 
to  them  from  the  speech  of  the  Zemes,  demanding  of  him 
what  he  hath  seene.  Then  hee  opening  his  mouth,  doateth 
that  the  Zemes  spake  to  him  during  the  time  of  his  trance, 
declaring  that  he  had  reuelations  either  concerning  victorie 
or  destruction,  famine  or  plentie,  health  or  sicknesse  or 
whatsoeuer  happeneth  first  on  his  tongue.  Now  (most 
noble  T^pce)  what  neede  you  hereafter  to  marueyle  of  the 
spirite  <'  f  Apollo  so  shaking  his  Sibylles  with  extreame 
furie :  yo^l  hadde  thought  that  the  superstitious  antiquitie 
hadde  perished.  But  nowe  whereas  I  haue  declared  thus 
much  of  the  Zemes  in  general,  I  thought  it  not  good  to  let 
passe  what  is  sayde  of  them  in  particular.  They  say  there- 
fore that  a  certaine  king  called  Guamaretus,  had  a  Zeme 
whose  name  was  Corochutus,  who  (they  say)  was  oftentimes 


♦Tobacco. 


40 


wont  to  descend  from  the  highest  place  of  the  house  where 
Guamaretus  kept  him  close  bound.  They  affirme  that  the 
cause  of  this  his  breaking  of  his  bandes  and  departure,  was 
eyther  to  hide  himselfe,  or  to  goe  seeke  for  meate,  or  else 
for  the  acte  of  generation:  and  that  sometimes  beeing 
offended  that  the  King  Guamaretus  had  bin  negligent  and 
slacke  in  honouring  him,  he  was  wont  to  he  hid  for  certaine 
dayes.  They  say  also,  that  in  the  kinges  village  there  are 
sometime  children  borne  hauing  two  crownes,  which  they 
suppose  to  be  the  children  of  Corochotus  the  Zeme.  They 
faine  likewise,  that  Guamaretus  being  ouercome  of  his 
enemies  in  battayle,  and  his  village  with  the  palace  consumed 
with  fire,  Corochotus  brake  his  bandes,  and  was  afterwarde 
founde  a  furlong  of,  safe  and  without  hurte.  He  hath  also 
another  Zemes  called  Epileguanita,  made  of  woode,  in 
shape  like  a  foure  footed  beast:  who  also  is  sayde  often- 
times to  haue  gone  from  the  palace  where  hee  is  honoured? 
into  the  woodes.  As  soone  as  they  perceiue  him  to  bee 
gone,  a  great  multitude  of  them  gather  together  to  seeke 
him  with  deuout  prayers:  and  when  they  haue  founde  him, 
bring  him  home  religiously  on  their  shoulders  to  the  chappell 
dedicated  vnto  him.  But  they  complaine,  that  since  the 
comming  of  the  Christian  men  into  the  Ilande,  he  fled  for 
altogether,  and  coulde  neuer  since  be  founde,  whereby  they 
diuined  the  destruction  of  their  country.  They  honoured 
another  Zeme  in  the  likenesse  of  a  woman,  on  whom  waited 
two  other  like  men,  as  they  were  ministers  to  her.  One  of 
these,  executed  the  office  of  a  mediatour  to  the  otK>Zeme, 
which  are  vnder  the  power  and  commaundemey^  of  this 
woman,  to  raise  wyndes,  cloudes,  and  rayne.  TK$  kher  is 
also  at  her  commaundement  a  messenger  to  the  other  Zemes, 
which  are  ioyned  with  her  in  gouernance,  to  gather  together 
the  waters  which  fall  from  the  high  hills  to  the  valleies, 
that  beeing  loosed,  they  may  with  force  burst  out  into  great 
floudes,  and  ouer  flowe  the  countrey,  if  the  people  do  not 
giue  due  honour  to  her  Image.   The  remaineth  yet  one  thing 


41 


worthy  to  be  noted,  wherewith  we  will  make  an  end  of  this 
booke.  It  is  a  thing  well  knowne,  and  yet  freshe  in  memorie 
among  the  inhabitants  of  the  Hand,  that  there  was  sometime 
two  kings  (of  the  which  one  was  the  father  of  Guarionex, 
of  whom  wee  made  mention  before)  whiche  were  woont  to 
absteine  hue  daies  together  continually  from  meate  & 
drinke,  to  know  somewhat  of  their  Zemes  of  thinges  to  come, 
and  that  for  this  fasting  being  acceptable  to  their  Zemes, 
they  receiued  answere  of  them,  that  within  few  yeeres  there 
shoulde  come  to  the  Hand  a  nation  of  men  couered  with 
apparell,  which  shoulde  destroy  all  the  customes  and  cere- 
monies of  the  Hand,  and  either  slay  all  their  children,  or 
bring  them  into  seruitude.  The  common  sort  of  the  people 
vnderstoode  this  oracle  to  be  ment  of  the  Canibales,  & 
therefore  when  they  had  any  knowledge  of  their  comming, 
they  euer  fled,  and  were  fully  determined  neuer  more  to 
aduenture  the  battayle  with  them.  But  when  they  sawe 
that  the  Spanyardes  hadde  entred  into  the  Ilande,  consult- 
ing among  themselues  of  the  matter,  they  concluded  that 
this  was  the  nation  whiche  was  ment  by  the  oracle.  Wherein 
their  opinion  decerned  them  not,  for  they  are  nowe  all  subject 
to  the  Christians,  all  such  being  slayne  as  stubernely  resisted : 
Nor  yet  remayneth  there  anie  memorie  of  their  Zemes,  for 
they  are  all  brought  into  Spayne,  that  wee  might  bee  certy- 
fied  of  their  illusions  of  euill  spirits  and  Idolles,  the  which 
you  your  selfe  (most  noble  Prince)  haue  seene  and  felt  when 
I  was  present  with  you. 


Conservation  Resources 
Lig-Free®  Type  I 


Conservation  Resources 
Lig-Free*  Type  I 
Ph  ».«L  Buffered 


