fyxntll Hwvmitg |f itag 

BOUGHT WITH THE INCOME 
FROM THE 

SAGE ENDOWMENT FUND 

THE GIFT OF 

Henrg W. Sag* 

1S91 



Hu^nic, c,.\>a\ \%. 



5931 



The date shows when this volume was taken. 

To renew this book copy the callNb'. and Rive td 
_1, Ifce tiSrarian, : 



AOfii'o 



\ HOME USE RULES. 
J953 H y A " Books subject to Recall 

"• Rnftlrs tint*, iii noofm 




i BP>rafi 

4OT 2 '5 <!W* 



Books not in. use for 
•instruction or research 
are returnable within 
4 Weeks. 

Volumes of periodi- 
cals and of pamphlets 
are held in the library 
as much as possible. 
Fop special purposes 
they are given out for 
a limited time. 

Borrowers should 
not use their library 
privileges for the bene- 
fit of other persons, i 

Students must re- 
turn all books before 
leaving town. Officers 
should arrange for 
the return of books 
wanted during their 
absence from town. 

Books needed by 
more than one person 
are held on the reserve 1 
list. 

Books of special 

. value and gift books, 

when the giver wishes 

it, are not allowed to 

circulate. 

Readers are asked 
to report all cases of 
books marked or muti- 
lated. . 



Do not deface books by marks and writing:. 



F 2380.B84 rne " 0n,Vera % Library 

UBS" 



F 
2>M 



C.I 




' . . . We all knew by the sad croak she gave ; 
And we said, ' She still grieves frjr her runaway slavs ! ' ' 



(A 83.) 




Cornell University 
Library 



The original of this book is in 
the Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 



http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924020443218 



LEGENDS AND MYTHS 

OF THE 

ABORIGINAL INDIANS OF 
BRITISH GUIANA. 



COLLECTED AND EDITED ,EY THE REV. 

WILLIAM HENRY BRETT, B.D., 

Missionary in connection with S.P* G,j Chaplain to the Lord Bishop of Guiana ; 
and Late Rector of the Parish of Holy Trinity, Esseguibo. 



Cvfc .*; 
f. V, 

LONDON 1 
WILLIAM WELLS GARD'NE'K; 

2, PATERNOSTER BUILDINGS. 

s 

E.rt, 






Aitrnt 




'?<; 



*/&■ 



/•<> 



llirtVlN BROTHERS, THE GRESIIAM t'RESS, CHILWORTH AND 



PREFACE, 



The chie f object of the present work has been to pr eserve, 
and to give at one view, the more serious traditions — 
religious, mythological, and historical — of the four aboriginal 
races who live nearest the shores of Guiana. 

A few of these legends appeared in a former work on the 
Indian tribes. To them are here added the more copious 
results of systematic research, extending over many years. 
A metrical form has been adopted, as agreeable to the 
native style in former days, when their national traditions 
Were recited with peculiar intonation — chanted, rather than 
told. 



The head-men, mostly sorcerers, who guar ded, and fr om 
time to time recited them, have, in the vicinity of our 
missions, nearly all passed away. Many time-honoured 
legends have expired with them, as the old state of things 
has yielded to the spread of Christianity. 



vi . PREFACE. 



The foregoing remarks apply only to the more serious 
traditions. Fanciful legends, of which a few specimens are 
also given here, are common to all. Some are very popula r, 
and will probably continue to be told, for the purpose of 
amusement, over their evening fires, as long as the native 
languages shall be spoke,n„ r - - , . , 



''GON-TfelvtTS; 



■ •■• ' PART f.- 
LEGENDS OF THE A'rAWAKS ... 


PACK 
' I 


"PART II. 




Legends of the Waraus 


49 


PART III. 




Legends ofthe Caribs 


87 



PART IV. 
Legends of the Acawoios 



.. 123 



PART V. 



Fanciful Legends 



163 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 



i. The Frog Spirit 

2. ArawAk clearing Forest ... ... 

3. The Chase on the Moruca 

4. Lagoon, with Warau Habitations 

5. Korobona and the Water Spirit 

6. Carib Family , ... 

7. Raft, with Carib Warriors 

8. Acawoios resting on a Journey 

9. Death of Ekahruwa 

10. Hauling over a Fall 

11. Serikoai tracking his Wife 



... 


Frontispiece 


... . 


.. „• p. 3 


... 


39 




5 1 


... 


68 




89 


... 


97 


... 


125 


... 


150 


... 


165 


... 


... ... 197 



PART I. 



^ 



CONTENTS OF PART I. 

Introduction 

I. Of the Supreme Being. 

Origin of Living Creatures (Legend of the Ceiba Tree) 

Origin of the White Race 

The Fire and the Flood 

Ideas of a Future State 

II. The Arawak Sorcerer's Legends. 

Arawanili and the Orehu 

Appendix to the Legend (Biter Bit) 

Arawidi (A Fragment) 

III. Historical and Warlike Legends. 

The Cannibal Mounds 

The Fight on the Bowruma 

The Fight on the Haimara Cabura ... 

The Fight on the Waiini 

Alliance and Intercourse with White Men 

Conclusion 



PAGE 
•■ 3 



/ 

8 


IO- 


14 


IS 


22 


26 


3° 


35 


39 


44 


46 


47 



The Arawaks formerly inhabited the whole of the West Indian islands. 
Those in the Lesser Antilles were exterminated by the Caribs, before the dis- 
covery of America by Columbus. The inhabitants of the larger islands 
perished soon after that event, under the oppression of the Spaniards. 

The few Arawaks who dwell near the coast of Guiana, and whose legends 
are here given, are now the only known representatives of a gentle and once 
numerous race. 




Legends of the Arawdks. 



INTRODUCTION. 

'Twas long ago ! yet still I view 
The scene to me then fresh and new, 

Where two fair rivers flow ; 
Where stately moras tower above, 
And palms wave gently in the grove, 

As pleasant breezes blow. 



LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

I see, as natives pass me there, 
Bright copper skins and jet black hair ; 
While one whose face is kind and fair 
The forest trees lays low. 



Alone that Indian came to me, 
A young white stranger's friend to be ; 
And hoping that the white man's " word " 
Might to the red men light afford. 
So when, oppressed by noontide glow, 
He sought my hut — too close and low ; 
We to the river would repair, 
And talk of Christ's religion there. 



There painted Caribs in our view 
Would pass us in their light canoe, 

And slowly glide away. 
We saw grim alligators sleep, 
And languid lizards near them creep, 

In the meridian ray. 
And there — while no sweet breeze above 
Would stir the leaves and cheer the grove, 
And water-lilies scarce could move — 

Would wait the cool of day. 



There he of God and of the soul 
Would question in the "Dutch Creole;' 
A "patois " I could daily hear 
From an old negress living near, 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 

And could reply to, right or wrong. 

But when he spoke his own sweet tongue, 

Too hard it was to understand, 

Though helped by signs with head or hand ! 

Time passed : he heard in his own tongue 
Truths which to Christian faith belong. 

Then, first, to God he prayed. 
And I from him their legends heard, 
With that old superstitious " word " 

Which he before obeyed. 
Of spirits good and bad he told ; 
Of sorcerers and warriors bold ; 
But chief, this legend, grave and old, 

Of HIM who all things made. 



LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 



I. 

OF THE SUPREME BEING. 

There is a mighty One above : and like Him there is none ! 
He sits on high, above the sky, where none can see His 

throne. 
He was there ere He made the world, with stars, and moon, 

and sun ; 
And evermore He will be there ; when each its course has 

run. 

Our tongue gives Him no proper name, but titles more 

than one ; 
We call Him " Dweller in the Height," J since there He 

sits alone. 
The " Great Our Father," 2 though to Him for comfort none 

have gone, 
And of " Our Maker " 3 oft we speak, but never call upon. 

That Mighty Maker all things formed ; 'tis He that made 

them move ; 
And food for all things He bestows, which seems a proof 
of love. 

But calm He sits above the sky, 
To Him for succour none can fly, 
He is so high above ! 

1 Aiomun Kondi. ' IfilicL W'acinaci. 3 W'amurreti-kwonci. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 



ORIGIN OF LIVING CREATURES. 

(Legend of the Ceiba Tree.) ^ / , ' , &.'* 
__L- re i£.c i *** r * ""*• 

Here, beneath this sacred tree, 

Old men told how moon and sun, 
Earth and sky, and wide-spread sea, 

Lay before the Mighty One. 
High He stood, where rivers run, 
Pausing, ere His work was done ! 

Waves, soft murm'ring, beat the strand, 

Gentle breezes sighed above. 
Still no life was in the land, 

No sweet birds sang songs of love. 
O'er the plain and through the grove, 
Nothing then was seen to move. 

Then his seat, " Komaka," I there- 
Wondrous tree ! — He caused to grow. 

'Midst the clouds its branches were, 
Earth and sea lay far below. 

Sacred trees we this day know ; 

None such vast dimensions show. 

From that bright-green throne, His hand 

Scattered twigs and bark around. 
Some in air, and some on land ; 

Some the sparkling waters found. 
Soon He saw with life abound 
Water, air, and solid ground ! 



1 The Ceiba, or silk-cotton tree. 



LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

Those which fell upon the stream 
Found a pleasant shelter there ; 

Shining fishes dart and gleam 

Where those woody fragments were ; 

Others sported through the air, 

Bright with wings and feathers fair. 

Moving, too, on solid ground, 
Or the river's marshy strand, 

Beasts and reptiles then were found, 
Spreading thence to fill the land. 

Men and women upright stand, 

Raised by their great Maker's hand. 



Wild fruits first were human food ; 

Water man's sole drink, they say. 
No bold hunters roamed the wood ; 

None would then take life away ; 
Beasts and birds would sport and play 
With young children day by day. 

On this earth our sire then came 
(Young and brave " Wadili " he), 

Saw their maidens, felt love's flame, 
Took them, fair, his wives to be ; 

Taught the native arts you see : 

Hunting, fishing, husbandry. 



ORIGIN OF THE WHITE RACE. 

Some addition has been made 

To that legend, grave and old ; 
Since our fathers here surveyed 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 

Steel-clad white men, strong and bold. 
They, with blood-hounds, we are told, 
Hunted men — and all for gold ! 

" Not from the Komaka tree 

Sprang the whites," our sages say ; 

" They from wood cast on the sea 
Rose, amidst wild ocean's spray, 

Finding land on which to stay 

O'er the waters — far away." 

" If from wood our race has sprung, 
Did it in these forests grow ? 

Did it to ' green-heart ' belong ? 
' Locust,' or ' balata? ' No ? 

Did its foliage ruddy glow 

With a mora's strength below ? 

" Ask no more, friend, you are wrong. 

Those trees give us, day by day, 
Bark, or gums, and timber strong : 

Useful gifts they all convey. 
But the white man's stock, they say, 
Good for nought, was cast away ! " 

Smiles on every face appear, 
Red men, seated on the ground, 

Laugh — that satire old to hear : 

Mild revenge ! which poor men found, 

Who escaped, in swamps around, 

Spanish " arcabuz " and hound ! 



LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 



THE FIRE AND THE FLOOD. 

Traditions of a deluge, we are told, 

In the New World prevailed, as in the Old. 

Those of our Arawaks may seem absurd, 

Yet stranger tales from inland tribes are heard. 

And far more wild were those which (Spaniards show) 

Were told by that same race in Bohio 

(Or Hayti) — for their race at first possessed 

Those lovely islands all, whose charms adorn the west. 



'Twas said in Hayti, that from magic gourd, 

By accident o'erturned, the deluge poured ; 

Till then that wondrous gourd enclosed could keep 

The num'rous finny tribes that swim the deep. 

No trac e of that wild legend I have fn nnd. 

Though strange were the traditions all around. 

The Arawaks, peculiar, understood 

Ta.zX.fire had swept the earth before the water-flood. 



THE LEGENDS. 

I. 

Fire is mighty — all-subduing ! 

Once its fury came, 
When the Maker, roused, was viewing 

Deeds of blood and shame — 
Evil raging, goodness failing- 
Then on earth, his wrath prevailing, 

Came the burning flame. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 

Timely warning came from heaven : 
" Fire shall sweep the land ! " 

One who heard that warning given 
Sought a reef of sand. 

By that chieftain's wisdom guided, 

Some a refuge there provided 
For their little band. 

" Here," said he, " a pit preparing, 

Wives and children hide, 
Timber strong, the sand-roof bearing, 

We must first provide. 
Piles will keep that shelter o'er us ; 
Comrades, work ! — the vault before us 

Must be deep and wide. 

" Felling next the trees, and burning, 

All around make clear ; 
Shrubs and grass to ashes turning, 

Leave we nothing here — • 
Nothing on which flames can fasten. 
Clear and burn ! O brothers ! hasten, 

Ere the flames appear ! " 



Clouds of smoke, the sun concealing, 
Come, still rolling nigher ; 

Then fierce flames, their might revealing, 
Wrap the woods in fire. 

Onward comes the blazing torrent ; ' 

That burnt " clearing " stays its current : 
There — the flames expire. 



LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

Thither, from that danger flying, 

Birds and beasts repair. 
In their vault those men are lying ; 

Smoke and heat they bear, 
While the flames around are roaring, 
And the fiery hail is pouring, 

Finding safety there. 

in $ * * * 

Coming forth, they see the ruin 

Through the lurid fume ; 

Ashes, which those flames were strewing, 

Spread funereal gloom. 
Blackened skeletons there lying 
Show where men and beasts, when flying, 

Met their awful doom ! 



n. 

Time flowed on. That fearful danger 

Long had passed away ; 
Punishment became a stranger ; 

All had gone astray. 
Violence and wrong abounded ; 
Men with evil good confounded, 

Growing worse each day. 

Evil ways have evil ending. 

When a warning — new 
Told them of a flood impending, 

None believed it true. 
Till Marerewana, hearing, 
For his wife and children fearing, 

Made a great canoe. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. . 13 

Some among his nearest neighbours 

Said he was to blame ; 
Others, mocking at his labours, 

Strove to give him shame. 
Still they found him at it working, 
Morn and eve, no labour shirking, 

Ere " great waters " came. 

" Make it large, Marerewana ! 

Strong and fair to view : 
Over forest and savannah 

Float — the deluge through ! " 
Thus they mocked their anxious neighbour, 
Mocked him at his heavy labour, 

Laughed at his canoe ! 

Archdd roof he thatched above it, • 

Palm leaves strong and warm ; 
Firm, that no fierce wind might move it, 

Ready for the storm. 
" Here," said he, " my loved ones, hiding, 
Through the tempest safe abiding, 

May be kept from harm." 

Still he feared ; and said with sorrow, 

" When this flood shall come, 
We may drift (perhaps to-morrow), 

Through the salt-sea foam ! " 
Said a voice, " That great tree near thee, 
Moor to that — thy craft shall bear thee 

Safely near thy home ! " 



14 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

Then, with lengthened bush-ropes mooring, 

(So our legends tell), 
He and his, the flood enduring, 

Weathered surge and swell. 
When the waters left them, stranded, 
Near their former home they landed, 

Known — and loved — so well ! 



IDEAS OF A FUTURE STATE. 

Columbus told how, on fair Cuba's isle, 

Where, spent with toil, he sought repose awhile, 

And gentle natives welcomed him to land, 

A venerable elder took his hand. 

Full fourscore years had bowed that old man's head, 

And to the Admiral thus solemnly he said— -^ 



" Great is thy power, O chief! But be not vain; 

And from all violence and wrong abstain. 

For, after death, there are before the soul 

Two ways ; each ending in a final goal. 

To light and life all the kind-hearted go, 

The cruel and unkind to dark and dismal woe ! " 



Belief like that — almost as clear— I found 

Among the heathen Arawaks around. 

Like origin with that old man they claim, 

Although their tribe may bear another name. 

And scarcely different from his we deem 

Their knowledge of one Lord, Eternal and Supreme. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 15 

Why did not they then on their "Father " call, 
Until the Christian teachers summoned all 
To join in prayer unto the common Lord ? 
The reason our next legend will afford. 
Here, as elsewhere, we superstition find, 
Excluding true religion from the darkened mind. 



II. 

THE ARAWAK SORCERER'S LEGEND. 
(1841.) 

ARAWANILI AND THE OREHU. 

The shadows now lengthen, and evening steals o'er us, 

Tall forests will soon hide the sun ; 
Our work being done, to the river before us 

My little red Indians run. 
With gay, merry shouts, and long hair wildly streaming, 

They plunge from a stump, one by one ; 
And little of danger from water-snakes deeming, 

Some swim the wide river alone. 
'Tis a dream of the past ; but how oft in such dreaming 

I view their glad sports going on ! 

Their gay, happy shouts, from the river ascending, 

Seem echoed from yonder clear sky ; 
With hundreds of voices from parrots there blending, 

As homeward green parrots now fly. 



16 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

The bright macaw's scream may be heard in the chorus, 

The toucan may add his harsh cry ; 
But mutely, on yonder tree, leafless before us, 

The sloth gazes round from on high. 
Ah ! let him beware ; for now, hovering o'er us, 

His foe, the bush-eagle, is nigh ! 



While through the dense forest the echoes are ringing 

Of those merry boys at their play, 
Sweet, silvery laughter the breezes are bringing — 
The girls are in their little bay ; 
Where the water seems flashing, 
With mermaidens dashing, 
And diving, and swimming away ! 



And now, though from distance we hear not the dash, 
We can see, far away, where the calm waters flash, 

As they catch the sun's evening rays. 
'Tis the stroke of some paddles disturbing their calm, 
And we see a canoe, where yon manicole palm 

Its fair, slender beauty displays, 
Lowly bending, as if 'twould its Maker adore, 

While myriads more 

Wave along the green shore, 
As the breeze seems to whisper His praise. 



Soon we see that canoe to our landing draw near, 
With two Arawak men, their wives, children, and gear ; 
They are soon on the bank, and assisting to land 
Their two aged parents, with kind, loving hand. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 17 

And tall is that patriarch, chief of his clan, 
Though he leans on his staff as a feeble old man ; 
What he bears, wrapped in palm-leaves, I cannot well see, 
But all shrink from its sound, as he hands it to me. . 

" O Maraka-kore ! " for so did they call, 
In their own native language, that sorcerer tall, 
(Which name means " Red-rattle," denoting his trade, 
Or that instrument rather, which dupes of them made) ; 
" Say, why do you bring your ' maraka ' to-day, 
With its handle adorned with birds' feathers so gay, 
And the stones rattling in it, the demons to scare, 
Or attract to the sick, as your people declare ? 

" In token that I from these things turn away, 

And renounce evil spirits ; I bring this to-day, 

From your neighbour Cornelius we hear the ' good word ; ' 

We believe, and are thankful for what we have heard. 

On myself and my wife feeble age has come on, 

And we wish to be christened ere life shall be gone." 

Such, in substance, he said ; and I need not here tell 
Of those of his brethren who gave theirs as well. 



" Pray tell me, old man," I one day to him said, 
" What were your traditions respecting your trade ? 
Who was the first sorcerer ? How came you to use 
This rattle, when demons you charm or abuse ? " 

Being urged by his sons and some friends who were near, 
He told a tradition they all longed to hear. 
3 



1 8 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 



THE LEGEND. 

A chieftain grave, both wise and brave — 

Good Arawan ili — 
Stood mournful by the silver wave 

Of the wide-spread ocean sea. 

His heart was sore ; the plume he wore, 

As chief of Ka ieri, 1 
Drooped — while he listened on the shore 

To the sigh of that ocean sea. 

Then, in his view, bright Orehu 

(The Water-Mother she) 
Rose, glistening as with drops of dew, 

Or pearls — from the ocean sea. 

Her beauty rare, which glossy hair 

Enveloped, flowing free, 
More lovely made those waters fair, 

And shores of the ocean sea. 

" Tell me thy grief," she said, " O chief ! 

The grief of Kaieri ; 
And I, perchance, may bring relief 

From the depths of the ocean sea ! " 



»•' ' Literally, " island." Some one of the Antilles. This most ancient 
legend is the only one I know in which their former possession of the 
West India islands is mentioned. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 19 

" Tis for the dead,'' the chieftain said, 

" For whom I nought could do, 
To help them, ere their spirits fled, 

From torturing Yauhahu. 



" Throughout this isle, man, wife, or child, 

By fever crushed, I view ; 
By demons' arrows * driven wild, 

Dire shafts of Yauhahu ! 

" Were mortal foe to work us woe, 
Their deeds they soon should rue ! 

But none, without a charm, I trow, 
Can face the Yauhahu. 

" Thy helping hand may save this land : 

Lady ! for that I sue. 
Grant me some charm, which may withstand, 

And quell the Yauhahu ! " 

" I hear, O chief! thy tale of grief, 

Thy people's grief," said she, 
" And thou shalt thank, for their relief, 

The lady of the sea. 

" Go, plant with care this branch I bear 

And rear the ' ida ' tree, 
Where, on yon hill, thy cottage there 

O'erlooks this pleasant sea. 

1 " Yauhahu simaira," a common expression denoting severe pain. 



LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

" When fruit is found, full large and round 

And heavy it will be ; 
Take that which first falls on the ground, 

And meet me by the sea ! " 



Slow from his gaze withdrew her face, 

As in the wave sank she. 
The tree he reared then at his place, 

And watched — the deep blue sea ! 



His watch was o'er, when to the shore 

The calabash bore he. 
The Water-Mother there, once more 

Met Arawanili. 



Its rind with care he emptied there, 
Through holes like these you see. 

She brought its handle, feathered fair, 
For Arawanili. 



And while he wrought, she dived and sought 

The gems of ocean sea ; 
And stones of shining white she brought 

To Arawanili. 



Tobacco, too, which none then knew, 
(Though common now) brought she : 

With charms, which made all Yauhahu 
Dread Arawanili. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUI AN A. 

To her he owed the power he showed, 
None since like him could be — 

So rich the gifts her love bestowed 
On Arawanili ! 



Still, to this day, in stream or bay, 

The Orehu men see. 
But " high above," grown old, they say, 

Rests Arawanili. 



When Numa, as was thought, 

A kind Egeria found, 
The sacred, mystic rites she taught 

The Roman people bound. 
Here red men hold what (they were told) 

The Spirit of the sea, 
By love constrained, in days of old, 

Taught Arawanili. 



The old man said, " That word 

We sorcerers received, 
Till of ' our Father's ' love we heard, 

And some of us believed. 
" We knew before that all we see 

He made, both great and small ; 
But ne'er were taught to Him to flee, 

Whatever might befall." 



22 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

'Twas so. The heathen all 
Said, " God, above the sky, 

Can never listen to our call, 
He is so great and high. 

" But demons who, by day or night, 
Cause pain and sickness sore, 

We must propitiate, or ' fight,' 

For man can do no more ! " 



Teach them the Saviour's word : 

That God doth condescend 
To be to us a gracious Lord, 

A Father, and a Friend. 
When they believe He heareth men, 

Though suffering, weak, and poor, 
They (like Maraka-kore) then 

To demons seek no more. 



APPENDIX TO THE LEGEND. 

Allusion was made 

To the tricks in their trade. 
Which those Indian sorcerers have commonly played. 

Now their method we show 

In a story we know 
Of what really happened a few years ago. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 23 

Two white men through our backwoods went, the Indian 

life to see, 
And much they wished of "piai-men " to learn the mystery. 
But 'twas in vain, till one declared that he was "taken 

sick ; " 
And begged his friend to "lend a hand, to carry out the 

trick." 



They knew a famous piai-man lived at a place near by ; 
" Oh come and cure this sick white man ! " He answered, 

" I will try." 
And so he brought his implements — no matter who might 

mock, 
He'd win the battle with the rattle Creoles call "shok- 

shok." 



He first the females sternly bade to " take themselves away." 
They all forthwith fled like the wind, too much afraid to 

stay. 
He then made up his sacred fire, to burn the sacred weed, 
His patient thought, " I like a smoke, but this is waste in- 
deed ! " 



His incantations then commenced, most terrible to hear, 
Both to the patient and the men who might be ling'ring 

near. 
He roared, he shouted at the fiends ; perhaps he dared to 

curse ; 
'Twas all in vain ; the patient groaned, and said, " I'm 

getting worse ! " 



24 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 



He next inhaled tobacco smoke, much as his mouth could 

hold : 
And blew it on the sick white man, who thought, " He's 

getting bold. 
It may be only want of sense — to fumigate my clothes ; 
But must be downright impudence to blow it up my 

nose ! " 

He next on the affected part his hands began to rub ; 

The patient grew convulsed at that,- 'twas such a ticklish 

job. 
With strong, but stifled, laughter, soon his body shook all 

o'er; 
That tickling was too much for him — he could hold out no 

more ! 



He laughed outright, then feebly tried to make that laugh 

a groan ; 
It would not do ! the doctor knew the difference of tone. 
He saw that he was being tricked, yet went on with his 

work; 
Not altering a muscle, but as grave as any Turk. 



According to their ancient rules, his mouth he next 

applied, 
To suck out what was causing pain in that white man's 

inside. 
Then from his mouth he would have spit nail, thorn, a claw, 

or pin, 
And said, " From this sick man I've drawn what Yauhahu 

put in ! " 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 25 

Now when our white friend's flesh was sucked, he strove to 

turn away, 
But " red-skin '' meant to earn his fee, and would not be 

said "nay." 
He seized him boldly with his teeth — it was a grip full sore — 
And, with a yell, the patient fell, out on the earthen floor ! 

Most cool the doctor was. By signs he made his meaning 

plain : 
"Get back into that hammock, I must operate again !" 
But the other shook his head, and said that that would 

" never do ! " , 

Then showed his friend his injured side, and said 'twas 

"bitten through." 

But he replied, " This savage doctor knows a thing or two, 
So do not quarrel with him, it would be much worse for you ; 
I'll tell him he has made a cure, and give a handsome fee." 
So he, with cash and fame secure, walked off triumphantly. 



From this, gentle reader, you get a small view 
Of what those men make a sick person go through : 
The clash of the rattle, and shouts, causing fear, 
Must be most distressing and painful to hear. 
Then the fumes of tobacco, and smoke of the fire, 
Will scarcely allow the poor wretch to respire. 

They spare not themselves ! When a man's on probation, 

And learning the mysteries of his vocation, 

He's shut up, and half-starved ; then, to take his degree, 

Drinks tobacco decoction, as strong as can be, 

Till he sinks in a trance : and revives — an M.D. ! 



26 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 



The Moral. 

If you near red- skinned sorcerers go, 

Though all things may seem handy, 
Don't let them on your person show 

Their " modus operandi." 
Speak always truth, and without fail 

To doctors — wild or tame — 
Such are the lessons of our tale, 

Which " Biter bit " we name. 



ARAWIDI. 
(A Fragment.) 

Our women have strong drink prepared, 
And view the gallant show — 

Where, gaily crowned, our men advance ; 

Bright feathers waving in the dance, 1 
As round the house they go. 

There learned sorc'rers sit or stand, 

Who chant our ancient lore : 
And, as they chant, responsive song 
Is heard in chorus, loud and long, 

Re-echoed o'er and o'er. 



1 The Arawaks have various dances. In one, the men challenge each 
other to give and receive alternate lashes round the bare calf of the leg, 
with a severe whip called " Maquarri," which is the name of the dance. 
This is a sort of funeral game, or commemoration of some departed 
male relative or friend, held some time after his death. It differs from 
the purely festive dance mentioned above. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 27 



THE LEGENDS. 

" Adaili is the glorious sun " 

(Thus their first legend ran), 
" But when of old on earth he came, 
Then ' Arawidi ' was his name : 

His fashion — that of man. 

" Once, fishing on a fav'rite stream, 

He made a dam, or weir, 
And said, ' This stream must not run dry, 
Lest, in my visits from the sky, 

I find no fishes here.' 

" The otters heard. They broke his dam, 

And let the waters flow. 
Then he, compelled to seek for aid, 
Its guardian the woodpecker made — 

His watchman — here below. 

" One day, while passing through the sky, 

Loud tapping caught his ear. 
Swift darting to that spot below, 
He found a fierce and mailed foe — 

The alligator — near. 

" He seized him with a mighty hand, 

Whose grip could never fail ; 
Then smote, to make the reptile yield, 
With that rJferd club he well could wield, 

Upon his head and tail. 



28 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 



" ' Oh, Arawidi, slay me not ! ' 

The alligator cried : 
' Cease, cease to wound ! Thy suppliant spare, 
And I will give a maiden fair 

To be thy beauteous bride.' 

i 

" He called his friends, the water-sprites, 

The maiden to provide ; 
And soon a girl, of wondrous charms, 
Was placed in Arawidi's arms, 

To be his lovely bride. 

* * * * >|: 

" The reptile's wounds were healed. Those blows 

No more his hide assail ; 
But still their marks are seen, 'tis said, 
Indented on his battered head 

And notched along his tail ! " 

# * # * # 

Then tales were told of others' fate 

(Wild children of the sun), 
With song and dance, till evening late 

Their tuneful course would run. 
And when the third day closed the feast, 
When drink had failed and dancing ceased, 

Those legends scarce were done ! 



NOTE TO ARAWIDI. 

One apparent object of the great chain of legends, to which this 
belongs, was to give a mythical origin to the peculiarities of the 
various animals of Guiana, in connection with the deeds of the 
heroic personages of their national folk-lore. 

In the foregoing tale of Arawidi, those of the alligator's per- 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 29 

sonal appearance are accounted for. In other legends, those of 
monkeys, jaguars, &c, were treated of. The fragmentary tale 
of the " Royal Vultures," of which the following outline was told 
to the writer by the Arawaks of Tapacuma, will show how they 
dealt with birds — real or fictitious. 

" A bold young Arawak hunter captures a beautiful royal vul- 
ture. She is the daughter of Anuanima, sovereign of a race 
which has its country above the sky. When at home there, 
they cease to be birds, and assume the form and habits of human 
beings. The captive, smitten with love for her handsome captor, 
lays aside her feathers, and appears before him as a beautiful 
girl. She becomes his wife, bears him above the clouds, and, 
after much trouble, persuades her father and family to receive 
him. All then goes well, until he expresses a wish to visit his 
aged mother, when they discard him, and set him on the top of 
a very high tree, the trunk of which is covered with formidable 
prickles. He appeals pathetically to all the living creatures 
around. Then spiders spin cords to help him, and fluttering 
birds ease his descent, so that at last he reaches the ground in 
safety." 

Then follow his efforts, extending over several years, to regain 
his wife, whom he tenderly loves. " Her family seek to destroy 
him, but by his strength and sagacity he is victorious in every 
encounter. The birds at length espouse his cause, assemble their 
forces, and bear him as their commander above the sky. He 
is at last slain by a valiant young warrior, resembling himself in 
person and features. It is his own son, born after his expulsion 
from the upper regions, and brought up there in ignorance of his 
father." 

The legend ends with the conflagration of the house of the 
royal vultures, who, " hemmed in by crowds of hostile birds, are 
unable to use their wings, and forced to fight and die in their 
human forms." 

The peculiarities of various birds common to the country are, 
in the episodes of this wild legend, whimsically accounted for. 
The following are instances :— 

The "kiskedee," though a valiant little bird, disliked the war, 
and bandaged his head with white cotton, pretending to be sick. 



30 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 



Being detected by more resolute warriors, as the hawk, &c, he 
was sentenced to wear the bandage continually. In time it 
marked his plumage ; and the white band is still conspicuous 
on the heads of his descendants. They are also noted for their 
hostility to hawks and other large birds, whom they attack in- 
cessantly when on the wing. 

The " warracobba " (trumpeter bird) and another quarrelled 
over the spoil, and knocked each other over into the ashes of 
the burnt house. The trumpeter arose with patches of grey, 
which are still seen on the plumage of his children. The other 
bird, which had been rolled in the ashes, became grey all over. 

The owl found among the spoil a package, done up with 
great care, which he thought would enrich him for life. It was 
a magical package, prepared by the foe for some emergency, 
and containing darkness. The darkness enveloped him as he 
opened it, and he has never since been able to endure the light 
of day ! 

Thus — often whimsical and puerile, but displaying much 
fertility and boldness of invention, with here and there touches 
of romantic beauty— were the mythical tales of the Arawak race 
in the days of yore. When the piai system began slowly to fade 
before Christianity, those legends, in their pure and connected 
shape, were no longer preserved. Their few remaining frag- 
ments are now distorted, intermixed, and in no two districts told 
alike. 



III. 

HISTORICAL AND WARLIKE LEGENDS OF 

THE ARAWAKS. 

(1865-66.) 

THE CANNIBAL MOUNDS. 

There are boats and canoes, with their gay colours flying, 
Whose strange motley crews oars and paddles are plying ; 
They come from the sea, where a vessel is lying, 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 31 

Which has from our city run down. 
Their course they are steering 
To this mission " clearing," 
Where on our thatched chapel the cross is appearing, 
Above a small Indian town. 

There is firing of guns, where our people are standing, 
And multitudes welcome the Governor landing, 
Whose uniform glitters with gold. 
His " aides " there attendant 
In helmets resplendent ; 
Their smart handsome belts, and bright scabbards de- 
pendent, 
The red men, delighted, behold. 
Then come other gentlemen, welcomed with cheering ; 
But most the good Bishop — all hail his appearing 
Once more — at that Indian fold. 

Men of every tribe come, our summons obeying, 

And nearly two thousand there stand. 
Helped by the Archdeacon, who with us is staying, 

We keep the wild throng well in hand. 
They who stand in the front decent garments are wearing ; 
While those sent behind have none such to appear in, 

And — gladly obey the command. 

Sun-pictures are taken, our ruler commanding 

Fair views of each scene to provide — • 
In one, squalid heathen are sitting or standing, 

With Christians well dressed at their side. 
In another, a mound its tall head is uprearing, 
A cutting runs through it, which some men are clearing, 

Whilst others are gazing inside. 



32 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

# * s£ sfc ♦ * 

That great "barrow" was seen when we first cleared the 
land; 

And it differs from all things around. 
For elsewhere the land is a " reef " of white sand ; 

That was made up of fish-shells, we found. 
Bones of birds and land animals also were there, 
So at length I cut through it, to lay the whole bare, 

Which such mystery seemed to surround. 

There, among shells and rubbish, were curious stones, 

Broken axe-heads, and implements rare. 
But few cared for stones ; seeing layers of bones — 

Human bones — of all sizes laid bare ! 
Skulls, in fragments long buried, were cast up to view, 
And all the long bones had been split open too, 

For the marrow, by savages there. 

Soon the news spread abroad j and our company came 

To that great Waramuri shell mound. 
But, meanwhile, other mounds, whose contents were the same, 

By the aid of our Indians, were found. 
None their history know — it was long, long ago — 
But cannibal habits the human bones show, 

Which in those " kitchen middens " abound. 



Our white friends have left us : their task being done, 

We see but our Indians there. 
And, for our evensong, with the next setting sun, 

To the wide-gaping shell-mound repair. 
We go in procession ; where, taking the lead, 
School-children with banners their teachers precede, 

And the old people bring up the rear. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 33. 



Soon, the beautiful strain 
Of " Jesus shall reign " 

From that grisly chasm ascends. 

From its edges above 

Wave the Lamb and the Dove, 
As o'er it each school-banner bends. 

This — the emblem of peace; 

May it spread and increase ! 

That — of suffering love, 

Shown by One now above, 
Who to man's supplication attends. 

And when praise and prayer 
We had thus offered there, 
The " cutting" was filled in next day; 
But the human bones found 
Were not placed in the mound, 
For all had been taken away, 
Then, to seek an old man, through the village I strayed, 
Who a bright feathered crown, of the toucans' breasts 
made, 
Gold and scarlet, was wont to display. 

Some had thought that photography was "not quite right ; '' 
And the artist's strange movements seemed magical quite 
So that old man had shifted his place on the sand, 

And caused a great deal of delay ; 
For the.camera's use he could not understand, 
Though he saw it was not meant for play. 
Some had said 'twas " a gun : " 
And — though he would not run — 
To have it aimed at him seemed very queer fun ; 
And he kept getting out of the way. 
4 



34 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

Yet he was a wise elder upon his own ground, 

Where no such adventures befeL 
There, with his tall son, my Cornelius I found, 

And other chief leaders as well. 
Of the wars of their nation those old men would speak, 
Legends such as in few years one vainly might seek ; 

What I heard from them I will here tell. 



THE LEGENDS. 

" Our fathers, who at first lived here, fought with the 

Meyanow ; 
A savage race, who ate mankind, of habits vile and low. 
They, long before, lived on this shore, if our old tales be 

true; 
Who else but they would make such mounds as you have 

now cut through ? " 



It was Cornelius who told this : the truth he may have 

found, 
For he was wise, and well he knew all the traditions round. 
His ancestors "prevailed," he said, "yet some perhaps had 

been fc 

Led captive by the cannibals — their bones we might have 

seen." 
But no one knew the certain truth ; it was so long ago ; 
And none with slayers, or with slain, would kindred claim 

or show. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 35 

Then said he, "When the Meyanow had all been over- 
thrown, 

The Caribs came, and little peace by any race was known. 

They seized our goods, killed all who fought, young people 
took away, 

For food or slaves, across the seas, so ancient legends say. 



" Those from the islands ceased to come ; we for a time had 

peace ; 
But Caribs on the mainland seemed in number to increase. 
On Orinoco numerous their warriors must have been : 
Many on Essequibo dwelt, many on Corentyn. 
And throughout Surinam we know they'd many fighting 

men ; 
Others, beyond the Marowin, were living in Cayenne. 
But everywhere they are the same : they tinge their bodies 

red, 
And with annatto smear their brows, which seem with 

blood o'erspread." 



THE FIGHT ON THE BOWRUMA. 

" Caribs from Essequibo banks to our Bowruma came, 
In one special season ; which was every year the same. 
And more and more they harried sore all who were living 

there, 
And made them cry, ' O let us die, 'tis more than man can, 

bear ! ' 



36 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

" Our fathers then a war chief made, whom all men should 

obey. 
And he, to rid them of the scourge, thought long, and found 

a way. 
He in the forest chose a place ; his men then cleared the 

ground, 
And all the trees they cut were laid there, in a circle round, 
Their branches all were outwards turned, while in the midst 

there stood 
A strong built house, two arrows' flight from the surrounding 

wood. 

" ' Now every roan give heed to me ! we have some months 

to work, 
And then must fight, for no man henceforth shall in covert 

lurk! 
So have your weapons well prepared : of arrows get large 

store.' 
And each man make a buckler, as our fathers used before. 1 

" So on the day appointed, to that house they all repair, 
There made to be their citadel, and for the fight prepare. 
Canoes they at the river leave, for Caribs there to view, 
And men to draw them to the place and give the warning 
due. 

" And they have lured now to that spot those warriors fierce 

and bold : 
Who chase their watchmen through the bush till they the 

house behold. 

1 The crew of the first canoe which approached the fleet of Columbus 
on the shore of the southern continent were Arawaks, armed with bows 
and arrows, and bucklers. I have heard no other legend, however, of 
any aboriginal tribe, in which the latter are mentioned. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 37 



The barricade there makes them pause — still they will not 

give in, 
Pride drives them on to take the place, so they the fight 

begin. 

"Their men who try to clamber o'er the Arawaks shoot 

down; 
Still their resistance, which seems weak, the Caribs hope to 

drown, 
They bend their bows, their arrows keen by hundreds seem 

to fly, 
Our men are galled, for bucklers broad scarce put those 

arrows by. 

" At length is heard their captain's voice — he cheers them 

with his call : 
' O comrades ! ye have bravely borne, now fight, Lokono ' 

all! 
Fight bravely for your children dear — fight bravely for your 

wives ; 
You fight now for your parents old — you're fighting for your 

lives, 
This day will clear those wretches from the face of this our 

land, 
Their arrows fail ! Now pour in yours, then on them club 

in hand/' 

"Forth from the house run boys — and wives, each to her 

husband's side, 
To hand him arrows, crouching low behind his buckler 

wide. 

1 Araw&ks call themselves "Lokono." 



3$ LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

Swiftly those arrows are poured in ; they shoot with might 

and main, 
And all the foremost Caribs are by those keen arrows slain. 
The others to the river fly : but foes are there before ; 
And sternly in the forest they pay off the ancient score, 
Till each red-painted warrior there lies redder in his gore ! ' 



That fight was on the Pomeroon, which we Bowruma call, 
A little stream there marks the spot, well known to Indians 
all." 



To tell of victory is sweet, 

Defeats few care to name ; 
But there invaders met defeat 

Who well deserved the same ; 
For where the Arapaiaco, 
And fair Ituribisi, flow, 
Those Caribs had spread bitter woe 

With arrow, club, and flame. 

While their flotillas swept the sea 
None dared their power defy ; 

But every canoe would flee 
The " Carinyach ! " fierce cry. 

By that dread name their race they call ; 

On those who heard it fear would fall ; 

The swift might fly, the feeble all 
Would yield themselves to — die ! 

Their cry, denoting savage power, 

Spread horror and dismay, 
On land too, at the midnight hour, 

At dawn or close of day. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 



39 



" Brave men," they sang, " our fathers were, 
And we their fame and valour share ; 
Your lives are ours, your daughters fair 
And goods — must be our prey ! " 




THE FIGHT ON THE HAIMARA-CABURA. 

The tellers of this legend were the old man and his son, 
Who showed me, on the shady stream, how that fierce fight 
was won. 



There is no need to tell again what has been told before ; 
Of how we suffered, from the Caribs, wrongs both deep and 



40 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

They who oppressed our fathers here from Orinoco came, 

Through Barima and Waiini, as we those rivers' name. 

Each year their painted warriors came, each year those 
rivers swept ; 

Poor captive women paddled them ; and as they worked 
they wept. 

Long time the Waraus, who lived there, their stern oppres- 
sion felt ; 

Until they fled to " ita " swamps, where more secure they 
dwelt. 

The Caribs wasted all that land; then said, "We'll plunder 

find, 
In those parts where Monica and its tributaries wind." 
They came; but war canoes, too large, could not from 

Waiini pass : 
Too little water was there then to float them through the 

grass. 

" O friends ! ere next wet season comes we must for them 

prepare ! " 
So spake our chief, and chose that hill, to make a refuge 

there. 
Then from all parts his brethren came until they mustered 

strong, 
To save their wives and children dear from violence and 

wrong. 

"Now make a camp upon the hill, where women may 

abide; 
We, who are men, will meet our foes down at the river's 

side." 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 41 

So to the river down they went, and there the captain 

made 
A massive log of heavy wood, which in the stream he laid. ! 
He fixed it tightly in each bank ; the spot we now can 

show — 
Just there — it near the surface crossed — not two hands'* 

breadth below. 



" Now let each man prepare his club, his arrows, and his 

bow, 
And each a pole, with hook at end— its purpose I will 

show. 
Some go to warn our brethren dear, who near the Waraus 

dwell ; 
While some as scouts must watch for foes, and of their 

coming tell." 

As our good chief had told his men, e'en so it came to pass, 
When next, in those great swamps, the water overtopped the 

grass, 
Many canoes, with painted crews, all warriors stout and 

strong, 
Slow winding through those narrow streams, came paddling 
; along. 

They stopped at every village there, but could no people' 

find; 
No people, and of property but little left behind. 
That all had down Monica fled, by certain, marks was 

shown, 
And sore displeased those Caribs were, because the birds 

had flown. . 



42 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 



Yet still they paddle on and on, but no canoes can see ; 
Until a fishing craft appears, with young men two or three. 
" O strive to catch that light canoe, which skims along so 

fast; 
These men we'll chase unto their place, and plunder gab at 

last ! " 



They raise on high their dreadful cry : " Carinyach ! " echoes 
round, 

As if yon Waramuri hill hurled back the hateful sound. 

Onward they race until their " chase " is seen to disappear 

Up this small stream ; and, without pause, the Caribs enter 
here. 

And here they have to wind about beneath the trees so high ; 

Yet still they onward rush and shout, nor think an ambush 
nigh. 

The small craft slackens speed at length — it is not under- 
stood — 

But they tear on with all their strength, and strike the sunken 
wood. 



That first canoe is broken : overthrown are all her crew ! 
And as they rise, with savage cries, keen arrows strike them 

through. 
Their comrades hasten at their cry, that they may help 

afford ; 
And forthwith, on the next canoe, a second shower is 

poured. 
A third, a fourth, a fifth, a sixth — the small stream winding 

round — 
Allows no sight of that fierce fight, they only hear the sound. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 43 

" Now, forward with your long hooked poles ! let no foe 

get away ! 
They came without our asking, but we'll press them sore to 

stay ! " 
They grapple with those great canoes, they drag them to the 

land; 
And there the brunt of battle is, all fighting hand to hand. 
Some use the single-handed club, some that broad hard' 

wood blade, 
Two-edged, "sapakana" called, which by both hands is 

swayed. 



With the last boats the chieftain came — Manarwa • he was 

called ; — 
His men could not retrieve the fight, the slaughter them 

appalled. 
And so, with two or three canoes, vowing revenge, he fled, 
While our men held the battle ground, and buried there the 

dead. 



Not long ago a portion of this river's bank gave way, 
Exposing groups of human bones — sad relics of that fray. 



1 A common name or title among Carib chiefs. 



44 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 



THE FIGHT ON THE WAIINI. 

Ere long the Caribs came in force, that they avenged might 

be, 
And our men, hearing, went to meet them on the Waiini. 
The Waraus would not help us fight, for they were sore 

afraid ; 
But they would act as scouts and spies, so giving useful 

aid; 
Until we drew our foes again into an ambuscade. 



Again we won the victory, again o'erthrew our foes, 

As each side fought with deadly hate, no cry for mercy 

rose. 
One champion on our side there was, Bohirasiri named 
(In old times oft his praise was heard, for in our songs he's 

famed) ; 
The Carib chieftain in the face with three-pronged shaft he 

shot; 
Struck down his warriors all around, and dragged him from 

the spot. 
The barbe"d weapon from his face the wounded chieftain 

tore; 
But cruel was the gash it made, and he could fight no more. 



Our men, when all was over, and our foemen crushed and 
slain, j* 

Said, " What must be Manarwa's doom ? shall he alive 
remain ? " 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 45 

So warriors and elders grave in council met next day, 
Where the old chieftain, wounded sore, was asked what he 

could say. 
" Oh why have you, these many years, vexed cruelly this 

land?" 
To which he could no answer give, as most may understand. 
But this he said, " Lo, here I stand ! — Arise, some one, and 

slay ! 
I'm in your power. But if you spare, and let me go away, 
My people all will grateful be, and, for their leader's sake, 
Will not again invade your land, but peace for ever make." 

Our race is not bloodthirsty. They resolved, our old men say, 

To take the Carib at his word, and let him go away. 

Four of his men alone still lived, they were with him set 

free; 
And their old chief the promise kept, which gained his 

liberty. 

Perhaps those Orinoco Caribs found our swampy land 
Was not so easy, as it seemed, to ravage and command ; 
Perhaps they learned what men can do who slaves will 

never be : 
Rememb'ring, too, that o'er picked men we'd gained the 

victory ! 
But still that act of clemency, we think, availed us more 
Than if we'd slain ten thousand warriors on that bloody 

shore. 

Whatever cause may be assigned, we found their inroads 

cease, 
And since those fights, of which I tell, this region has had 
■; - peace. 



46 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 



ALLIANCE AND INTERCOURSE WITH WHITE MEN. 

The Dutchmen to our fathers said, 
" Make peace with us, and let us trade, 

In firm alliance joined. 
In peace and plenty all may live, 
While you to us assistance give, 

Guarding the woods behind. 
Use your stone implements no more, 
Of iron tools we have great store, 

Which you will better find. 
Clothes, which your women ought to wear ; 
Combs, shining bodkins for the hair ; 
Beads, looking-glasses, bright and fair, 

To please the female mind." 

Our fathers to them made reply : 

" Your goods are pleasing to the eye, 

But men such things may dearly buy 

With loss of liberty ! 
We all are hunters, free and brave ; 
No Arawak must be a slave. 
Make that your law, you then will have 

Faithful allies and free ! " 

We thus maintained our liberty ; 
The Dutchmen all declared us free 

And well observed the same. 
But Christ's good word was never brought 
To us, nor were our children taught, 

Till other white men came. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OR GUIANA. 47 

From them (Moravians), in Berbice, 
Our brethren heard the word of peace, 
Till trouble made their missions cease. 

We still were left alone. 
At length to Essequibo came 
The English : and the Saviour's name 

To red men there made known. 



To us, then, came that Saviour's word, 
Which most opposed, but some few " heard," 

And helped to spread it round. 
To our old foes, the Caribisce, 
We paddled you, with words of peace, 

Which there acceptance found. 
Then, with the red cross waving free, 
To Waraus went, along the sea, 

To plant it on new ground ; 
That all red men might Christians be, 

And blessed peace abound ! 



CONCLUSION. 

Thus Sacibarra x (such his name, 
Ere it " Cornelius " became) 

Would speak, when growing old. 
Good chief ! who, long before, to me, 
Of that " High " Lord, " whom none can see," 

Their ancient legends told. 



1 Lit., " beautiful hair ; " name given in infancy. 



48 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

And came alone, Christ's word to hear, 

Till others rallied round ; 
Who helped a mission church to rear, 

With cross and belfry crowned, 
Reflected in the waters clear, 
With palms and feathery bamboos near, ' 

Where he had cleared the ground. 

All those who then met there, save one 
(Whose hand now writes), are dead and gone. 
The mission crowns a neighb'ring hilL 
That river's banks are hushed and still. 

No children now, with sportive grace, 
There swim from shore to shore ; 

But still the bamboos mark the place 
(Long since with " bush " grown o'er) 

Which still one mem'ry loves to trace, 

Where the chief sought his Maker's face, 
And told their ancient lore. 

And all who told, in their sweet tongue 

(Most sweet, as all allow), 
These tales, which to their race belong, 

Are still and silent now. 
They wait us on that other shore, 
Their voices here are heard no more ! 

Now turn we to the wilder lore 
Of the uncouth Warau. 



PART II. 

Stgatite of i§z WZmuz. 



CONTENTS OF PART II. 

Introduction 

Mythological Tales 

I. Legend of Okonorot£ 
II. Legend of the Drought 

III. Legend of the Great Waters 

IV. Legend of Korobona (i) ... 

(») ... 

(3) - 

(4) - 
V. Warau Ideas of Departed Souls 

VI. Legend of Aborj£ (the Warau Father of Inventions) 
Sequel to the Ancient Legend 





PAGE 




• 52 




• S3 




• 55 




. 6o 




. 62 




. 64 




. 66 




. 69 




• 73 




■ 74 




. 76 




• 84 



The Waraus (Guaraons, or Guaranos) were dwelling where they now are 
at the time of the discovery of the southern continent. The early Spanish 
explorers, and Sir Walter Raleigh, who followed them, gazed with wonder 
at their fires, seen at night half way up the trees, as their expeditions 
passed by. 

The writer, searching for some traditions of their ancient faith or history, 
came, to his surprise, on the wildly romantic mythological legends which 
are here given. 



52 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 



Legends of the Waraus. 



INTRODUCTION. 

Where Orinoco, through his delta wide, 

By numerous channels, seeks the ocean tide ; 

Where, annually, his waters flood the ground, 

And wide lagoons, with muddy isles, abound, 

The fan-like branches of the ita palm 

By thousands wave above his waters calm. 

Those stately trees supply the rude abode 

Which the poor Warau makes above the rising flood. 



That race, of old from other legions driven, 
•Could mot have lived, bat for that shelter given. 
UnwaarEke, they could not their foes withstand, 
But hod to' yield to them the higher land. 
On fish and crabs those Waraus chiefly live, 
Which in abundance there the waters give. 
Their palm-tree 1 pith a kind of bread affords, 
Its leaves give thatch and cords* the split trunk serves- for 
boards. 



' The mauritia (or morische) palm, called by the ArawSks "ite." 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 53 

Yet some provision grounds those Waraus have, 
Where land appears above the tidal wave ; 
And from their swampy refuges they come, 
Beneath our rule to find a peaceful home. 
From Orinoco to Moruca's stream, 
More numerous than other tribes they seem. 
And farther east, where ita swamps abound, 
Even in Surinam, the Warau race is found. 

We called the tribes — a mission space to clear 
At Waramuri, for the Waraus near. 
Unkempt, unclad, their women there we found ; 
Their naked children wallowed on the ground, 
With filth and ashes grimed— sad sight to see : 
We wondered how such way of life could be ! 
Most wild and gaunt the men, who took no care, 
And only wished to be — just what they were. 
Lower than others, as he would allow, 
And satisfied to be so, was the poor Warau ! x 



MYTHOLOGICAL TALES. 

Their ancient belief we had long wished to hear : 
Some had said 'twas "romantic," while others said 
" queer." 

But, from shyness or fear, 

Till the twenty-first year, 
Of their most knowing sorcerers none would come near. 
Then, at last, a friend told me to send for "McLeod," 

1 Warau — pronounce the latter syllable like "row," a quarrel. 



54 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

Who to be their most learned by all was allowed. 
And that Warau of fame 
(With the highland Scotch name), 

After long hesitation, consented, and came. 

His visit to us was a favour most rare : 

So myself, our good teacher, and other friends there, 

With honour received him, and offered — a chair. 

But he sat on the ground, 

With his Waraus around, 
Whose costume was most " light and airy " we found. 

They — with long, matted hair, 

And bare skins — squatted there, 
While their chief a striped shirt condescended to wear. 

Their traditional "word " 

A good friend there had heard ; 
Partly Warau was he, and to him we referred. 
For a mixture most strange through some tales seemed 

to run ; 
Their most serious matters so blended with fun, 
That (though none of the red men there thought it absurd) 
We could scarcely believe it the " Old people's word." 

" Oh tell me, McLeod, did not slaughter and woe 
First cause the Waraus to that swamp-land to go ? 
Did you not live inland, where the clear waters flow, 
Ere the fortune of war sternly drove you below ? " 

" Stern foes have indeed caused the Waraus to fly : 

But they first lived on high, 

Above yonder blue sky, 
Ere they came down the good things of this world to try. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 55 

Such, such is the tale of our forefathers given, 
Who thus rashly lost their high station in heaven ! " 

We opened our eyes ; 

But he, calm and wise, 
Superior smiled, and enjoyed our surprise. 
Then resumed : " What I tell you, you will not believe, 
Yet hear now the legend our elders receive." 

I. 

LEGEND OF OKONOROTE. 

" Say, Okonordte, thou archer so gay, 
With bright feathered ornaments, whither away ? 
Let the birds now beware of thy clear, glancing eye ; 
For thine arrows bear death to all creatures that fly ! " 

" With my arrows so keen I pursue a rare bird, 
Of whose lovely plumage we often have heard ; 
That bird I must find, though I cannot tell where ; 
But its flesh I must eat, and its plumage must wear." 

So Okonordte' went forth on his way, 

To seek that rare bird with its plumage so gay. 

He could only shoot birds, for above the blue sky 

Were no living creatures, save those that could fly, 

And the young Warau race, who in that high abode 

Had been placed by their Maker, the Wise and the Good. 

That search he engaged in for many a day ; 
But still, as it saw him, the bird flew away, 
Till (surely some evil one brought it to pass) 
He saw it alight in a clump of high grass. 



56 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

Then, lying flat down, he slid over the ground, 
Like tiger or snake which some victim has found; 
The distance diminished, yet still he crawled on, 
Saying, " Oh for one shot ere the bird shall be gone ! " 

At length he had crawled within shot of that bird, 
When lo ! it flew up, as some movement it heard. 
With keen arrow transfixed the bright beauty was slain, 
And, with quivering wing, fluttered down to the plain. 

Glad Okonorote" sprang up with a bound, 

And, shouting for joy, made the meadows resound. 

"No longer," said he, "need I rise with the sun 

To pursue this bright bird, for my prize now is won ! " 

Then he searched all the ground — 

Walked around and around ; 
Strange ! — arrow and bird were nowhere to be found ! 

Such a loss who could bear ? 

He looked everywhere, 
Till he saw a deep pit, and said, " Both must be there ; " 
And the sides being steep, he approached it with care. 

But gone was his arrow for ever and aye ; 

Gone too that bright bird with its plumage so gay. 

And he, fascinated, unable to move, 

Saw daylight beneath him, as well as above ! 

There, far, far below, 

He could see forests grow; 
Wide plains, and savannahs, where rivulets flow. 
And he looked down for hours those new wonders to view, 
Thinking, " All is a dream, sure it cannot be true ! 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. S7 



" Some charm fills mine eye, 

Or do I espy 
On the green plains below, living creatures pass by ? " 

He could see there the deer and the peccary go, 
The choice paca, and others, which now we all know ; 

While birds which soar high, 

Rising near to the sky, 
And some, nearer earth, his clear vision could spy ! 



" Now hear, Waraus all ! You know what I have seen ; 
And many here present to view it have been. 
Prepare a rope ladder; I must go below 
And see if those creatures are useful or no. 
If it be as I hope, 'tis our people's great gain, 
And if I lose my life, one man only is slain." 

Oh, great was their fear lest his life he should lose j 
But Okonordte" none e'er could refuse. 
So all to the woods, picking cotton, would go, 
For forests of cotton were there, as we know. 
(Perhaps they used " bush-ropes " the cotton to aid). 
It took many months, but the ladder they made. 
It was lengthened above when too short it was found, 
Till it grappled the trees upon this lower ground ; 
And it then, tight above, with strong braces was bound. 

Bold Okonordte", determined to go, 

Strong-limbed, and brave-hearted, then ventured below. 

'Twas a perilous venture, to come from above 

By a ladder so frail, which light currents could move. 



58 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

And when he was down, he stood gazing around 
In utter amazement at all things he found ; 
The life, so abundant, he saw with surprise, 
The quadrupeds strange, and their wonderful size : 
For all seemed most wonderful then to his eyes. 

He must have seen wild beasts devouring their prey, 

For jaguars and snakes then had all their own way. 

And he thought he would venture to taste some large game, 

So he shot a young deer, and soon kindled a flame, 

In the Indian style, with two pieces of wood ; 

And the ven'son he found to be excellent food. 

Ascending again ! — Oh, what labour and pain 

To the quick-heaving chest ! — to the limbs, what a strain ! 

It was hard to come down ; but to climb up again ! 

(Though we came from the sky, 

r had rather not try : 
Some people turn giddy when mounting too high.) 
It was done but that once, as you'll find by and by. 

A portion of game he brought up from below j 
Not much, but sufficient his people to show : 
His words (and its flavour) put all in a glow. 
" Oh ! we cannot stay here ; for there is little good 
In the small birds around us : but animal food 

We know to abound 

On that lower ground, 
Which Okonordte" for Waraus has found ! " 

So they asked no permission, but said, " We will go ! " 
And came down the rope ladder to this world below. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF.GUIANA. 59 

All things then were young — no old people were found ; 
Small children they carried, and all reached the ground 
In safety, save one — a poor woman, the last, 
Who got wedged in the hole which the others had passed. 



Her husband below her sore trouble could view, 

And climbed back to give help, but could not get her 

through ; 
Then, his head turning giddy, he went down below, 
Where his people all thought it a terrible blow, 
And in clamorous talking gave vent to their woe. 
They all asked how it happened. He could not tell how ; 
So the thing was mysterious to ev'ry Warau. 

Then the women, upbraiding, would ask, " Is it right 
For that man to come down, and not stay up all night ? 
Brave Okonordte" ! he climbed up before ; 
Will he not go up now, with a man or two more, 
Since the husband, resigned, has quite given it o'er !'' 



They all shrunk from the task, for a man there had said, 
Whom they straightway discovered to have a wise head, 
" Supposing you reach her, and can pull her through, 
Will she not be the death of you all, if you do ? 

You will find it no fun — 

She will come with a run ; 
Consider how you, in that case, can hold on ? 
You must be swept off, and our best men be gone." 



60 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

So the woman remains (though the ladder gave way), 
And will always remain there, our old Waraus say. 
She fills up the hole ; and, good friends, that is why 
We never can get a fair peep through the sky ! " 



He paused. Some were laughing, and all the rest smiled 
At a " descent from heaven " so grotesque and wild. 
Then the old Warau said, " You all think I ' make fun ; ' 
But it is in this way that the legend must run, 
And so I must tell it. If not, I have done ! * 

Being soothed, he resumed, in a different tone, 

For the course of his legends more serious had grown.. 



II. 

LEGEND OF THE DROUGHT. 

" See the Warau race begin 
Life in this new world below. 
With their bows the hunters win 
Plenteous food — no want they know ; 
Yet they feel within them grow 
Anxious dread of future woe. 

Safety, which in heaven they had, 
Here on earth cannot be found ; 
Good is mingled here with bad ; 
Savage beasts of prey abound. 
Reptiles coil in trees around, 
Or lurk, deadly, on the ground. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 61 

One thing then filled all with fear, 

Scanty water and unclean ! 

'Twas not as we now see here, 

Where large streams have long time been ; 

Streamlets small, in marshes green, 

Then were all that could be seen. 



" Oh, where shall we water find, 
Till the wished-for rain shall fall? 
Other woes we bear, resigned, 
But this thirst consumes us all ! 
Let us now, both great and small, 
On our mighty Maker call. 

" We forsook our Father-friend : 
We forsook His place on high ; 
Death by thirst He now will send ; 
Through his wrath these pools are dry. 
To Him, brethren, let us cry, 
He may hear above the sky ! 

" O Karima (Father) Thou ! 
We Thy place no more shall see. 
Once in heaven each Warau 
Happy was near thee to be. 
But we have forsaken thee, 
Thence proceeds our misery ! 

" Ka-idamo (Master) Thou I 
All things are at Thy command ; 
Seeking water vainly now 



62 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

We may roam through this dry land. 
Must we perish 'neath Thy hand ? 
Wretched, miserable band ! " 

Kanonatu, throned on high 
(So Waraus the Maker call), 
Heard, and from the dark'ning sky 
Caused the welcome rain to fall ; 
Made the rivers great and small, 
Which abundance bring to all. 

Women then, with happy glee, 
Filled their vessels to the brim : 
While the men saw joyfully 
Glitt'ring fish in rivers swim. 
Strange it seemed, and, like a dream, 
Food and drink in every stream ! 



From my tale you now have heard 
How Waraus came from on high. 
What remains still of this "word " 
I will tell you by and by. 
Now the sun hath left the sky, 
And your hour of prayer is nigh I 



III. 

LEGEND OF THE GREAT WATERS. 

Years rolled on, and men, grown hateful, 

Ceased their passions to restrain ; 
Took their Maker's gifts ; ungrateful, 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 63 

Thanked him not for sun and rain ; 
But forsook Him once again, 
When they ceased to suffer pain. 

" Kanonatu," seeing slaughter, 

Acts of rapine, deeds unclean, 
Sent their punishment by water, 

Which had once their blessing been. 
Floods, obeying Him, were seen 
O'er the hills and valleys green. 

Eight poor men, in that disaster, 

With six women, trembling stood. 
Pausing in His wrath, the Master 

Saw their hearts still true and good, 
Bade them take the " bahbi " wood, 
Safe to float amidst the flood. 

Evil spirits of the waters 

Saw them then float past undrowned. 
They were saved that sons and daughters 

Might again on earth be found, 
And from them mankind abound, 
Fish, and hunt, and till the ground. 



He who saved them had provided 
Land, to which they might repair. 

Streams appeared as floods subsided, 
One small lake shone bright and fair. 

Yet of that he said, " Beware ! 

Shun its waters, bathe not there ! " 



64 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

Well our sires obeyed the warning ; 

Some to guard that lake they chose, 
Lest some bather, danger scorning, 

There should meet with deadly foes. 
Ages pass. No Warau goes 
Where those waters calm repose ! 



IV. 

LEGEND OF KOROBONA. 

Two Warau maidens sweetly sang, 

" O waters calm and clear ! 
We love our happy walks to take 
By thy sweet margin, woodland lake, 
And find our pleasure here." 



Those maidens, from the hills at first 

That guarded spot would spy. 
Then, though their brothers said, " Beware, 
The lake is fatal, bathe not there ! " 

They dared to venture nigh. 



At length fair Korobona said 

(The elder sister she); 
" We, by an idle threat restrained, 
From these clear waters have refrained ; 

Come, sister, bathe with me. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 65 

" For what is here to do us harm ? 

We maidens are alone. 
Waraus, with superstitious awe, 
Both old and young obey the law ; 

Intruders here are none." 



Straight she plunged in ; for scant attire 

Our maidens wore, I trow ; 
Though wild beasts' teeth,' with woven seeds, 
And shining stones (they had no beads) 

Adorned each young Warau. 



Then both, through waters fair and clear, 

Began to dive and swim ; 
The elder sister, void of fear, 
Went first ; the other followed near, 

Obeying every whim. 



Before her Korobona saw 

A rod of charmed wood. 
Oh that some power had stayed her hand, 
And forced the maid to let it stand — 

Her safeguard while it stood ! 



But, wild with glee, she shook the rod, 

And broke the mighty charm. 
They saw a man-like form arise, 
And Korobona was his prize, 
Held by a powerful arm. 
6 



66 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE . 

(A water spirit, 'neath the wave, 

Lay bound by mightier power ; 
Till some one, swimming in the lake, 
Should dare that charme'd rod to shake. 
That was the destined hour. ) 

"O Warau maid ! " the spirit said, 

" Thy sister there may go ; 
But thee I hold. O woman fair ! 
Thou for a time my home must share, 

And come with me below.'' 



Sad Korobona weeps at home 

Upon her sister's breast. 
It had been comfort in her woe 
That her four brothers did not know 

Now she is more distressed. 



O Korobona ! time has passed ; 

Thou art a mother now ! 
And lo ! thy brothers, as they stand, 
(The eldest with his club in hand), 

To slay thine infant vow. 

" Kill not my baby girl," she cries ; 

"Slay Trie — the mad and wild ! 
But she a gentle maid will be, 
And serve you all most lovingly. 

O spare the helpless child ! " 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. &]■ 

Why should I dwell upon this woe, 

With greater far to tell ? 
Their hearts were softened by her prayer, 
They gave the infant to her care : 

Though grieved,- they loved her well. 



Of that young child we hear no more, 

And think she must have died. 
Meanwhile the spirit of the lake 
Most strangely would his pastime take, 
Near that bad waterside. 



A snake immense, from tree to tree 

Disporting he was seen ; 
Or, in his human form, would stand 
Where gentle ripplets mark the sand, 

Beneath the branches green ; 

And sometimes as a man above, 

With serpent form below ; 
Until the keepers said, " What hand 
Can this dread ' Wahma's ' power withstand ? 

His nature who can know ? " 



And Korobona hears the tale 
Of him who fills her mind ; 
Then, heeding not her sister's prayer, 
Steals to the lake, and watches there, 
Resolved the truth to find. 



68 



LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 



And long she waits beneath the trees 
Filled with strange hope and fear ; 
Whilst he, who can her presence spy, 
In serpent form eludes her eye, 
Yet still is drawing near. 




His head seems like a floating seed, 

By gentle breezes blown ; 
The tail, like filmy scum, is near 
(Thus, seeking prey, such snakes appear), 

No other part is shown. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 69 

Why, Korobona, dost thou stoop, 

That floating seed to view ? 
He cries, triumphant, " Thou art mine ! 
Unto thy fate thyself resign I" 

And captures her anew. 



in. 

The hapless Korobona now 
Lives in the woods alone ; 

Another babe there hides from view ; 

For if her fault her brothers knew 
Blood only could atone. 

She weepeth sore for woes in store, 

Which she can well foresee ; 
But that fair boy her tears now warm, 
Who shares in part his father's form, 
Her greatest grief is he. 

She, in the day which gave him birth, 

At first essayed to fly, 
But soon returned to that deep glade, 
In which the helpless one was laid, 

Drawn by his feeble cry. 

And by her sister, kind and true, 

Who o'er her errors wept, 
That secret (soon to be revealed, 
For eyes and ears cannot be sealed) 

Hath faithfully been kept. 



79 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

One, passing by, the infant's cry 

Heard, and upon her came. 
Then told her brethren, hunting near ; 
And soon she saw the four appear, 

All wild with rage and shame ! 



Two of them dragged their sister home ; 

Two turned the child to slay, 
There lying, helpless, in their view : 
They with an arrow pierced him through, 

And left him where he lay. 



" The child is dead," the slayers said, 
" The mother mad and wild ! " 

They let her gp to make his grave. 

But knew not that the care she gave 
Revived that hapless child. 



He grew far more than other babes 

In wisdom and in size ; 
And, still concealed in some thick tree, 
Till he his mother's form could see, 

Would shun all other eyes. 



With food she daily sought the woods 
Where he was doomed to stay, 

And there held converse with her child ; 

Till sorrow, by their talk beguiled, 
Would seem to pass away. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 71 

But Korobona. quite forgot 

That some her track might know — 
Her track — by those small footprints shown ! 
Each brpther then, her secret known, 

Prepared the shaft and bow. 

" Oh, why," she said, " these arrows made, 

And these stone weapons too ? " 
The brothers gave her short reply, 
Then through the woods they saw her fly, 

And hastened to pursue. 



" Oh, hide me, mother, from their eyes," 

The wretched victim said ; 
" Alas ! why didst thou give me birth ? 
For I have found no place on earth, 

And now shall soon be dead ! " 

The mother, clinging to her son, 

Then screened him from his foes, 
And left small space at which to aim, 
Yet to its mark each arrow came 
From their unerring bows. 

They cut him into pieces small, 

She cursed their cruelty : 
" Vile slayers of the innocent ! 
The woes you fear will now be sent — 

And come through you, not me ! 



72 Legends and myths of the 

il See here your Korobona lie ! 

This spot shall be her tomb, 
Where this poor blood o'erspreads the ground. 
Think on it when your woes abound* 

And Waraus meet their doom ! " 



IV, 

Of her who watched her outcast dead 

(In mournful " Bible word "), 
And " suffered neither bird nor beast " 
Upon the loved remains to feast, 
My Warau never heard. 

He never heard ! yet in his tale 

We seemed the like to hear, 
How vultures and wild beasts could see 
A mother in her misery, 

And none would venture near; 

While food her loving sister brought ; 

She, that the heap might bloom. 
Laid bright green leaves and flow'rets red 
Upon the body of her dead, 

Which had no other tomb. 

There, sweet and fragrant, still was found 

That spot, by blood defiled. 
A mighty wonder happened then, 
For that great change which waits all men 

Touched not the serpent child. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 73 

At length that heap, with flowers bedecked^ 

Began with life to heave : 
She seemed these words to hear, " Thy son 
Shall now avenge his murder done : 

O mother, cease to grieve !" 



And first a head and shoulders rose, 

Slow growing from that mound : 
She saw a mighty form appear, 
Well armed, to fill all foes with fear, 
With limbs complete and sound. 



With weighty club the warrior stood, 

With bow and arrows keen ; 
White down adorned his short black hair, 
His skin like copper shone, more fair 

Than with Waraus had been. 

And with vermilion were besmeared, 
Like blood, his cheeks and brow. 
Thus the first Carib stern arose, 
A warrior strong to smite his foes, 
Dread sight to each Warau ! 



The brethren four their warriors called, 

Appalled that sight to see ; 
But few to face his club would dare, 
All those who did he slaughtered there, 

And forced the rest to flee. 



7H LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 



No Warau could his strength withstand ; 

Their arrows turned away. 
Their warriors fled to save their lives, 
While he their daughters took for wives, 

And all their goods for prey. 

And as his children still increased, 
They took the Warau's place. 

Invincible, from Wahma sprung ! 

Though still (by mother) they belong 
To our despised race." 



" And now my tale is done at last ; 

My people's fate you know, 
Who from the heavens, in days long past, 

Came down to earth below, 
And since to swamps were driven, where now 
You may behold the poor Warau ! " 



V. 
WARAU IDEAS CONCERNING DEPARTED SOULS. 

When Waraus were, as we have shown, 

Oppressed by stronger foes, 
The fears which they through life had known 

Beset them at its close. 
Each charged his children when he died 
To place his weapons at his side. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 75 

" Lay bow and arrows in my grave, 

That I may keep at bay 
The souls of foemen fierce and brave, 

And all who bar my way. 
My soul, thus armed, none dare withstand, 
To keep it from the spirit land ! " . . 

How different was the legend told 

On Trinidad's fair isle ; 
Where Waraus gathered fruits of old 

And rested there awhile ; 
VVhere souls of good men they could find 
In glittering humming birds enshrined ! 

Those birds, like flashing jewels seen, 

Bedecked each lovely bower. 
As ruby, topaz, emerald green, 

They kissed each fragrant flower, 
And saw fair hills and forests rise 
Around their blissful paradise. 

But Chaymas dared those birds molest, 

Then — sank beneath the ground ! 
And now, where happy souls had rest, 

The lake of pitch is found. 
Wild Warau myth of ages past — 
To English readers told " at last ! " * 

1 C. Kingsley's "At Last," chap, viii., One can imagine the delight 
with which the author of ' Westward Ho," with the tropical scenery 
he had long read and dreamed of in all its glorious reality around him, 
must have listened to the legend of " the humming birds "—the sweetest 
myth of the western world. 



76 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

VI. 

LEGEND OF ABORE 

(The Warau Father of Inventions). 

In those Warau traditions it moved our surprise, 
That beneath their coarse veil of mythology lies 
A lesson, which Christians deem holy and wise. 
For those first legends show how mankind suffer woe, 
Who their Maker forsake, in their own way to go, 
And they differ in this from most others we know. 

Ere McLeod went away, 

Our good teacher one day 
Said, " I ask one more story, you must not say nay, 
Of all Warau legends you are the narrator ; 
Pray tell of Abore", your first navigator." 

So the old man his store of strange legends thought o'er, 
And told this, of which fragments had reached us before. 

" In this world, we know 

That for weal, or for woe, 
Good spirits and bad ever move to and fro ; 
And all our old men will most strongly avow 
That some help, but more hinder, the suffring Warau." 

THE LEGEND. 

" Abore", away 1 

No longer delay, 
Nor, loitering, stay to waste here half the day. 
Men must hunt for wild bees while the sun says they 
may." 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 77 

She who thus chid the youth was a fine, handsome dame, 
Who from childhood had reared him. — Wowtah was her 
name. 

Abore" the clever, Abore" the brave, 
Had served her caprices like some household slave. 
To follow her wishes the youth was content, 
Although his keen mind on inventions was bent 
Bows, arrows, and such things he strove to improve ; 
But she was most jealous lest aught he should love 
More than her, and from all his works sent him away, 
To search the dense forests for bees, day by day. 



Sometimes he had ventured resistance to try, 

But Wowtah had quelled that by a glance of her eye ; 

And he had to obey, though he could not tell why. 

That day through the forest quite gloomy he went, 
To search out the honey for which he was sent, 
When he saw, sitting down on the root of a tree, 
A young Indian maid — fair and graceful was she. 
" Oh, who can she be ? I ne'er met her before ; 
She must be some stranger come down to our shore." 



He passed without notice, as good Indians do, 

But she said, " Abord ! thy parents I knew, 

And this day I am glad their tall son here to view. 

But what canst thou see 

In that huge hollow tree, 
Where serpents and scorpions hiding may be ? " 



73 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

" I search these old trees 
For the nests of wild bees, 
That I may with their honey my kinswoman please." 

" Abore - ! the truth will appear by and by. 
Wowtali is a spirit. Such also am I ! 
We spirits assume any figure we please ; 
We change as we like, and we do it with ease. 

Some appear as bush-hogs, 

Some as jaguars or dogs ; 
While some, as large snakes, love the rivers and bogs : 
But Wowtali chose to be the great queen of the frogs. 

By day or by night, 

It was then her delight, 
With a terrible croak, other creatures to fright. 
(Sometimes to Waraus she would cause some alarm.) 
A strange taste it was, though it did little harm." 

Then the kind spirit told him how, " when a young boy, 
He was seen by Wowtali, and became her chief joy ; 
How she, in the form of a woman, deceived 
His parents, and was in their cottage received. 
How his parents soon died, and no mortal knew how, 
But Wowtali was suspected by every Warau." 

She told him how " soon, from an infant in arms, 

He had grown a tall youth through Wowtali's mighty charms. 

How, save to fetch honey, he scarce left her side, 

And how he would soon have to make her his bride." 

Then, pondered Abore", " This tale may be right ; 

When Wowtali is much pleased she will croak with delight. 

She croaks at the honey, she croaks upon me ; 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 79. 

But bride to Abord she never will be ! 
Oh, tell me, kind spirit, and I will obey ; 
Shall I go back and slay her, or flee far away ? " 

" O seek not to slay ! 

But heed well what I say, 
'Twould be vain to shed blood, nor canst thou flee away. 
Having grown 'math her charm, still her slave thou must be, 
■ Unless thou canst flee from her o'er the wide sea ! " > ■ 

She paused. The young man wished her still to go on, 
But when he looked round the good spirit was gone. 

The honey he found, and soon robbed the poor bees 
(Where bees have no stings one can do that with ease), 
Then returned to the house ; where Wowtah kindly spoke, 
And welcomed him home with her most gentle croak. 
As she had been cross in the morning, at night 
She became doubly kind, just to put matters right. 

But the young man was gloomy, and wrapped up in thought ; 
He said to himself, " Into bondage I'm brought, 
But with the first dawn will escape far away, 
And if this bad spirit can find me — she may ! " 

From morning till night then he marched through the wood, 
But with the next daylight before him she stood ! 

Again he would roam, 

And again be brought home ; 
He could flee to no place whither she would not come ; 
And the moment he caught the stern glance of her eye, 
He was forced to return, though he could not tell why. 



So LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

Since, baffled and shamed, he could not get away, 
He made up his mind his hard mistress to slay ; 

And he felt no alarm 

At the thought of the harm, 
For the death of his parents his vengeance would warm. 

Then a cocorite palm he found, somewhat decayed ; 
It suited his purpose, and forthwith he made 
A deep cut, that its fall might no more be delayed. 
A small prop he then placed its great pressure to bear, 
And removed that support when he saw her come there. 

It fell on her head, 

And he thought she was dead, 
Saying, " Now I am free from the life I have led ! " 

But she from the ground 

Rose, uninjured and sound, 
For she could not be killed, as Abore - then found. 

Almost in despair, he then thought on the day 
When the good spirit said to him, " Seek not to slay ! " 
And then he remembered her words, " The wide sea j " 
Oh, how can I cross it, that I may be free ? " 

He thought on all ways which the Waraus then knew 
To float on the deep, and found none that would do. 
There were then logs of wood on which men used to go, 
With their feet hanging down in the water below ; 
And rafts of light branches, which sometimes were made, 
When over smooth streams they their children conveyed. 

But rafts of light wood 

Could by no means have stood, 
Or danced over the waves of that great rolling flood, 
And he saw that for his purpose they were not good. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 81 

The half of a gourd he could readily float, 
But its shape, he soon found, would not do for a boat. 
From an oblong seed-pod his best model he drew, 
Which he strove to improve by all methods he knew. 

He formed a large vessel of wax — which, though drained 
Of its former contents, in abundance remained ; 
He improved on its shape till our people might view 
What they call " woMka," but others " canoe." 

Then his frail craft he tried 

At the next " waterside ;" 
But his mistress came there, and severely she eyed — 
Then broke it, and scattered the wax far and wide ! 

Determined to go, though in waxen canoe, 
(He dared not work in wood, which far better would do) T 
He sought a young cousin, whom " brother " we call, 
And begged him to help him, whate'er might befall. 

"Abore", with thee 

I will brave the salt sea. 
I should fear to remain, lest she next bewitch me ! 
We will work in the bush, where no Warau can see." 

They must have used then a stone chisel or axe, 
To cut wood, to make paddles, or strengthen the wax. 
Food, and gourds to hold water, they had to provide, 
Though forced, for the time, their equipment to hide. 

Abore" then thought, " If Wowtih chance to spy 
Our flight, she will stay me with her evil eye. 
I must prevent that, or, at least, I will try." 

7 



82 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

So he took, her a nest of fine honey to see, 
Which was deep in the heart of a large hollow tree ; 
He'd before taken care a great wedge to prepare, 
Which he drove tightly in, and Wowtlh was kept there, 
Whose great love of sweets led her into the snare. 

" Now, now we must fly — 

To look back is to spy, 
And be fixed by the power of that evil eye ! 

Brother, off and away ; 

Let us launch while we may ! 
We must pull for our lives now by night and by day '* 

" Ho, Waraus ! " he then to his countrymen cried, 

Who that waxen craft with astonishment eyed ; 

■" This, this is the shape which your vessels must have, 

With this they will readily dance o'er the wave. 

Observe well this form, you will all find it good ; 

Make your woibakas so, friends; but make them of wood." 



Thus he quitted die strand 

Of our poor Warau land. 
Men and women, regretting, were ranged on the sand. 
And thus they beheld, from the wild ocean shore, 
Their last of Abore - — they saw him no more ! 



Now, when he was gone, 

Wowtah, quite alone 
In that huge hollow tree, began loudly to moan. 
Some passers-by heard her, and, finding her plight, 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 83 

They would not let her out, for they said, " She's served 
right. 

The young man of most brains 
(For none like him remains) 
She has driven away ; let her die for her pains. 

" The things he could make, 

Which this female would break ! ' 
From her he was right his departure to take. 

We have seen his canoe, 

And know what he could do ; 
Which, but for her malice, he would have done too. 

He said he knew how 

To clothe every Warau ; 
Not in such strips of bark as we're forced to wear now, 
With a few shells and teeth strung to make a small show ; 
But in fair woven fibres from shoulder to toe. 
And now — how to make such, we never may know." 

No mercy was shown, though she still made her moan ; 
And she found by the silence the people were gone. 
She knew that, as woman, she could not get free ; . 
But near to her feet a small op'ning could see ; 
So, again as a frog, through that crevice crept she. 



That was long, long ago ; 

How long none can know ; 
But ever since that she has gone to and fro. 
Of late in the swamps, o'er our evening fire, 
We talked of Abore", when nigher and nigher 
She came. We all knew by the sad croak she gave ; 
And we said, " She still grieves for her runaway slave ! 



84 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 



SEQUEL TO THE ANCIENT LEGEND. 

We offered our thanks to our old Warau friend, 
And thought that his story there came to an end — 
As doubtless it did, in the ages long past, 
But he said, " Waraus heard of Abore" at last. 

" He went o'er a smooth sea; and, ere long, he found land — 
Some island — and landed upon that new strand. 
There, discarding the wax, he a craft made of wood, 
And visited places, just as he thought good. 

At last he arrived where white people abound, 
Whom poor and distressed above all men he found. 
They did support life, he could hardly tell how ; 
Far more wretched were they than the lowest Warau. 
When he saw them his heart with compassion flowed o'er, 
And he said, ' I will make my abode on this shore.' " 

So he made up his mind the white people to raise ; 
And the way he has done so deserves their best praise. 

They, squalid and bare, 

Had no garments to wear, 
Till taught by Abore" good clothes to prepare. 

He taught the white people to weave and to sew, 
To be skilful in wood and in iron, we know, 

From a nail to a gun. — 

(Ah, you may think it fun — 
But you owe to Abort: the things you have 'done !) 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA.. 85 

And to this pray attend ! 

To the whole world a friend, 
The good things he had made in large ships he would send. 
He thus obtained wealth, though he cared not for pelf, 
But strove to help others while helping himself. 
He improved the rough plan of his first waxen boat 
To the huge ships we see now — great monsters afloat — 
Which bring you all things, from a pin to a coat. 

'Tis said that Abore" still lives, though no tree 
That grows in our woods can be older than he. 
The magical power which, when he was young, 
That spirit imparted, has made his life long, 
If he were to return she would claim him again ; 
So he^s forced m the white people's land to remain. 

Yet presents he used to send every year ; 
From the time the Dutch told him they found Waraus here. 
Those presents they gave in their colony's name ; 
That was nonsense ! We knew from Abord they came. 
But they all at once ceased, and some must be to blame. 

We think that in Georgetown they still are received ; 
That he would cease to send them cannot be believed. 
Knife and gun, ammunition, a cutlass and hoe, 
Rum, needles and pins, with some coarse calico, 
Were once freely given to each. Alas ! now 
There is payment demanded from ev'ry Warau ! " 

The presents here mentioned, as every year made, 
Were the price of assistance to Indians paid. 
When slavery ceas'd their help was not required, 
So the custom of annual "presents" expired. 



86 ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 

No loss to the Indians, but great moral gain ; 
For now they must work for the goods they obtain. 

Such opinion may be 
Held by you or by me, 
But with that the old Warau would never agree. 

We gave him some clothes ; he had earned them full well ; 
Having come six days' voyage these legends to tell. 
And we strove in his language Christ's words to explain, 

That some better gain 

He might thereby obtain ; 
But in Warau traditions he chose to remain. 
He returned to his place near the Barima's shore, 
And we saw old " McLeod " at our missions no more. 



The creed of his race he had shown in these tales ; 
Shown, too, how their faith in strange spirits prevails. 
In their service alone the Waraus used to live ; 
But now to their Maker due worship they give. 

Though the bones which we found 

In the cannibal mound 
Made them think Waramuri a weird haunted ground ; 
Now around that huge heap Christian Waraus abound. 

And civilisation first showed itself there, 

In their women's neat hair and the clothing they wear. 

For. much better off now, 

As all races allow, 
Than his forefathers were, is the Christian Warau. 



PART III. 

g*jgm&s of % €aribs. 



CONTENTS OF PART III. 



I. Historical Sketch 

Struggles with Early Colonists... 
II. Warlike Legends. 

The Carib War-path 

The War on the Orinoco 

III. Mythological Legends of the 

x. The First People 

2. The First Cultivation . 

3. The Rock and the Wood ... 

IV. Legend of Amalivaca 

,, Manarowa-(i) 

t> .. (=0 
Conclusion 



Ancient World 



PAGE 

.. 90 

■■ 92 

■• 95 
99 
. 102 
.. 103 
.. 104 
.. 106 
.. no 
. "5 
117 
. 120 



The Caribs, when discovered by Columbus, were in possession of the 
smaller West Indian islands, and had begun to attack the larger. 

Of their origin nothing certain is known. Humboldt states that the 
opinion common amongst Europeans in the sixteenth and seventeenth cen- 
turies was that they came from the vicinity of Darien, and that more recently 
they were supposed to have come from the northern continent. 

But the constant tradition of the Caribs themselves, both in the islands 
and on the main, claims Guiana as the cradle of their race, and the Orinoct 
as the point from which they started on their career of conquest. 

A comparison of their language with that of the Orinoco Tamanacs, and 
with that of the Chaymas to the north of that river, will confirm, as far as 
language can, the truth of their tradition. 



tH§Hyi 




A CAEIB FAMILY. 



go LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 



Legends of the Caribs. 
i. 

HISTORICAL SKETCH. 

From Orinoque, in days of old, 
The Caribs (so their legends told) 
Came forth, to ravage and command, 
And spread their power o'er sea and land. 

By conquest they the isles possessed, 
Those lesser gems which stud the West. 
Where no male Arawiks remained, 
They made, of ev'ry isle thus gained, 

A cannibal stronghold. 
Then, 'gainst the larger islands went — 
Or to the southern continent — 

Their warriors strong and bold ! 
Famous for valour and for wiles, 
Those seas, for near five hundred miles, 

Their red Vikings would roam ; 
And warlike women guard their isles 

While they were far from home. 

When white men came, and conquered all, 
The milder race was doomed to fall : 
In Cuba — as in fair Hayti — 
Enslaved by Spanish cruelty, 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 91 

Or slain — all passed away ! 
But Caribs made a fiercer stand : 
Fighting till death, that for their land 
. Invaders dear might pay. 
None thought of yielding — few of flight ; 
Then women, maddened with the sight 

Of their brave husbands slain, 
Would rush on pikes and swords — to fight 

The battle o'er again ! 

Meanwhile their race upon the " main " 
Had fought, supremacy to gain. 
And this became their nation's boast — 
" From Orinoco, to the coast, 
We hold the tribes in terror all, 
And lord it over great and small ! "' 

All those who near the ocean dwelt, 
Friendship for English Raleigh felt 
" A naked race,' - wrote he, " but I 
Have met none braver 'neath the sky." 

They fought a common foe : 
So on Caroni, Corentyn, 
And Essequibo wide between, 

His boats might freely go — 
E'en to white Rupununi's wave : 
For Caribs loved that warrior brave 

Who wrought the Spaniards woe ; 
And long they kept the flag he gave, 

That they his ships might know. 1 

Bancroft (1769) mentions it as still preserved by them. 



92 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 



STRUGGLES WITH EARLY COLONISTS. 

Where Caribs held the sovereign sway, 

White colonists they kept away. 

The Spaniards and the Portuguese 

Fell, by their weapons and disease. 

The Dutch, with Arawaks allied, 

Might in their settlements abide, 

On Essequibo and Berbice ; 

Importing negroes, they had peace. 

But from the Surinam, men say, 

The English twice were driv'n away— 

And Frenchmen likewise from Cayenne — 

By those same " brave, though naked men." 

One story of those times will show 

How they could strike a fatal blow. 



" Bretigny — man of evil fame — 
First Governor to Cayenne came. 

Frenchmen were there before, 
Living as Indians there in peace — 
Their wives and language ' Caribisce '; 

Thinking of France no more. 

" Stern their new ruler, harsh his deeds, 
For trifling acts the white man bleeds ; 
Most cruel was his sway. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 93 

The natives, too, he dared oppress. 
Then Caribs vowed, in stern redress, 
That tyrant chief to slay ! 

" But Indian women often love 
The European far above 

Their own red countrymen. 
So Cortez found in Mexico. 
And thus Bretigny came to know 

His danger in Cayenne. 

" Soon as, from female lips, he heard 
The Carib plan, he gave the word 

To ' seize all Caribs ' there. 
Each casts himself into the wave, 
And in a shark will find his grave, 

Ere bondage he will bear. 

'" Ho ! hasten, Frenchmen, all of you ; 
Bring quickly forth my large canoe — - 

Myself will take command. 
Upon those wretches we must fall, 
And slay forthwith, or drown them all, 

Ere they can reach the land ! ' 

" Swim now, ye Caribs, for your lives ! 
Or you your children and your wives 

Will nevermore behold. 
That great canoe can swiftly run ; 
Her crew have halberd, sword, and gun ; 

All Frenchmen, strong and bold ! 



94 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

" They gain the shore. Then, in pursuit, 
Bretigny lands — for without fruit 

He will not turn again. 
'Tis evening. Still he searches there ; 
And finds an Indian cabin, where 

He may all night remain. 

" Ah ! — little does Bretigny know 
The tactics of an Indian foe ! 

The trees have eyes to see 
Where he abides ; and all the night 
The Carib warriors, armed for fight, 

Are coming noiselessly. 

" With morning light they all appear, 
Hundreds of painted warriors near, 

Each with his bended bow. 
Vain will the sword and musket be 
Against their rapid archery ; 

And that the guardsmen know. 

" Then* roused from sleep, Bretigny sees 
Their forms, red gleaming through the trees, 

Surround him everywhere. 
Wrapped in his cloak, he silent stands 
To meet his fate from Carib hands 

By club and arrow there. 

" They slay his guards, then rage around 
Wherever colonists are found ; 
Destroying all white men. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 95. 

The Frenchmen come again, but fail ; 
Tis twenty years ere they prevail 
And settle in Cayenne." ' 



At length each colony became 

Too strong to dread the club and flame ; 

While the fierce Caribs had, we know, 

A native and more savage foe. 

On Orinoco fierce the strife — 

Many a warrior lost his life. 

Then the brave Eastern clans would go 

To fight and crush that native foe. 



II. 

WARLIKE LEGENDS. 

THE CARIB WAR PATH. 

The way they marched to all was known, 
Custom had made that track their own. 
'Twas to those rovers mere child's play 
To plunder there, sometimes to slay, 

And often to enslave. 
And all the peaceful tribes, who dwelt 
Around — the heavy hand had felt — 

Of Caribs, fierce and brave. 

1 In 1664, under M. de La Barre. The English had by that time 
made a settlement on the Coma, or Surinam, which, in 1667, was ex- 
changed with the Dutch for "New Holland," the present New York. 
Essequibo and Berbice (now English) were colonised by the Dutch in 
the early part of the seventeenth century, and remained in their posses- 
sion nearly two hundred years. Demerara was also founded by them, 
though at a much later period. 



g6 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

Their large canoes were often seen 
As they sailed round from Marowin 
And Surinam to Corentyn, 

Then towards that river's head. 
Above the falls they cross Berbice, 
And march where all is perfect peace 

i(For peaceful are the dead). 
That region they have swept quite bare, 
And all the people who lived there 

Are captive, slain, or fled. 

O'er Essequibo then they go ; 
Plunder Macusis, or, below, 

Sweep the Brazilian plain. 
Or towards those mountains bend their course 
Where noble rivers have their source — 

The Pacaraima chain. 

Then, northward of that mountain line, 
With the Caroni men they join. 
There many rivers have their rise. 
Descending one, they soon surprise, 

Near Orinoco's tide, 
Some peaceful village ; or destroy 
A warlike band, and thus annoy 

Their foes who there reside. 

On rafts concealed they float near shore, 
With grass or branches covered o'er. 
Sometimes on fallen trees they glide, 
Such as come downward with the tide. 
Woe to the victims they surprise ! 



98 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

All adults slain, each girl a prize 

Must in their hands remain. 
Then with the plunder of the place, 
Their own far distant homes to grace, 

They eastward turn again. 



Once from those parts a message came 
That tarnished was their ancient fame, 
And from their nation's warlike name 

The glory had been rent. 
To reassert the Carib might, 
Her thousand warriors for the fight 

Then Essequibo sent. 
That number largely was increased 
By Caribs who lived farther east ; 
By Surinam's bold fighting men, 
By warriors even from Cayenne ; 

And they all westward went. 
For sore was then the nation's need, 
And every Carib man made speed. 

Gay ornaments they cast aside, 
War's stern equipment to provide. 
Weapons and hammock each man bore, 
Cassava bread, and meal in store; 
With paint each face was reddened o'er, 

To terrify their foes. 
All left their families that day 
The stern war summons to obey. 
Burning their enemies to slay, 

None could in peace repose. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 99 



THE WAR ON THE ORINOCO. 

Now when they reach Caroni's banks, 
They find additions to their ranks. 
From fair Barahma, Waiini, 
And Amacuru, men they see ; 

Some from Bowruma's head. 
All come to fight the Cabre" race, 
In Cabre" blood wash out disgrace, 

And thus avenge their dead. 



By desultory fights enraged, 
Both sides in earnest had engaged. 
The Cabres made their clans unite 
Under one leader for that fight, 

And dealt a deadly blow. 
The Caribs, who till then believed 
Themselves invincible, received 

A total overthrow ! 



Most of them were in battle slain, 
Many were drowned, and few remain 

To tell how went the fight. 
But there is one T remembers well, 
Who has been spared that he may tell 

Of the succeeding night. 



1 Humboldt's account. Some of our Caribs say that two men were 
thus spared. 



LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

He then was forced to climb a tree, 
That thence he might the better see 
The savage victors eat the slain ; 
And there the wretch had to remain 

Till morning, legends say. 
The chieftain, Tep, released him then, 
And bade him " bring his countrymen 

For food some other day." 



Ah ! better had the victors spared 
That horrid deed and taunt, which, heard, 
Inspired with deadly hate their foe, 
Who vowed to strike a mortal blow. 



They vowed, and had it in their power, 
Their strength increasing every hour. — 

Allies by hundreds came. 
At length ten thousand men, they say, 
The Caribs mustered for the fray, 

To wipe away their shame. 



In deadly fight they met again ; 
Each meant to conquer or be slain. 

The Caribs victors were. 
Their fury nothing could withstand — 
Though Cabre"s met them hand to hand, 

And fought with wild despair — 
Nor thought of turning from the fight : 
They found the memory of that night 

Was heavy then to bear. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 101 

They saw the numbers of their foe, 
Which seemed continually to grow ; 
And so — returning blow for blow — 
They fought ; and perished there ! 



Their warriors then in battle fell : 
And stern the fate, as legends tell, 

Of all who bore their name. 
For, soon as that grim fight was done, 
Extermination was begun ; 

Soiling the victor's fame. 

The conquering Caribs then could go 
Where Orinoco's torrents flow ; * 
Where castellated rocks are seen, 
O'er the vast foam, with summits green ; 
Whose graceful palms and forest trees 
Seem shadows, till the wished-for breeze 

Disperse the mists around. 
Returning home, each Carib brave 
Would pass by many a bloody grave : 
But, from those falls to ocean's wave, 

No living foe was found ! 



1 The great cataracts {or Raudales) of Atures and Maypures. 

As the Caribs themselves have always been accused of cannibalism, it is 
but fair to the survivors of that race in Guiana, to say that all those whom 
I have spoken with deny that their fathers ever were guilty of it, save in 
mimic action, as a vaunt or threat, to terrify a foe. 

Humboldt, who treats the subject fully in his "Narrative," acquits 
the continental Caribs of the charge, while admitting the cannibalism of 
the Cabres (as stated above), of various other inland tribes, and of the 
Caribs of the islands in former days. 



LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 



III. 

MYTHOLOGICAL LEGENDS 
OF THE ANCIENT WORLD. 

The Caribs now from foes are free, 
Enjoying feast and revelry. 
A large canoe is brought on shore, 
And with " paiwari " running o'er. 
Gay feathers crown each warrior's head, 
Each has his body tinged with red ; 
And each, with strip of cotton dressed, 
Disposes it o'er back and breast. 

Their women, who most wild appear, 
Less clothing than their husbands wear, 

Yet each herself adorns. 
For anklets, woven bands we see ; 
Another band below each knee. 
(Pins now through lower lips project, 
As if each would her face protect, 

But then they all wore thorns.) 
Some stain their skin with spots of blue, 
And thus, attractive to the view, 
They watch the dance, and join it too. 

Men beat the drum, or sound the flute 
(The thigh-bone of some human foe) : 

But all at length are hushed and mute, 
And empty is the large canoe. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 103 

The feast is o'er ; but old men stay, 

And pass in talk another day. 

Of wise old chieftains, warriors bold, 

And battles in the days of old, 

They tell. While some, from eastern streams, 

Discourse on these more ancient themes. 



I. THE FIRST PEOPLE. 

From on high mankind descended ; 

Not (as some would say) for food ; 
They to cleanse this world intended, 

That it might be fair and good, 
Bright and free from soil or stain, 
As the moon, or starry train. 



While they toiled, the clouds receded, 
Which had borne them from on high ; 

Vainly for their help they pleaded ; 
None restored them to the sky. 

Thus mankind remained below, 

In a world of toil and woe. 



As they wandered, pangs of hunger 
Forced them clayey earth to take ; 

Which, that they might starve no longer, 
Making fire, they tried to bake. 

But their cakes, when they were " done," 

Were like sand, or crumbling stone. 



104 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

Tamosi * had there provided 

Wild fruits, suiting beast or bird. 

By those creatures kindly guided 
To the trees which each preferred, 

Men partook : but still would sigh 

For the food they left on high. 



2. THE FIRST CULTIVATION. 

Tamosi, the Mighty Maker 
(Whom no mortal eye can see), 

Made, that man might be partaker 
Of His gifts, a wondrous tree. 

Though on earth huge trees have grown, 

None like that was ever known. 



High o'er all its head uprearing, 
Cloudlike mass of brilliant green ! 

On its noble branches bearing 

Fruits, which none before had seen. 

Each a different kind would bear ; 

Beauteous clusters, high in air ! 



Lower down — its trunk surrounding, 

Plaintains grew, bananas sweet : 
-Vll choice plants were there abounding 

Which we now (in gardens) meet. 

'"Tamosi Kabo-tano " (Ancient one of Heaven), the Supreme 
Being. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 105 

Golden maize, so fresh and fair, 
Waved its plumy tresses there. 

Sweet cassava one might find there, 

With the bitter, 'neath the fruits ; 
Yams, potatoes, every kind, where 

Widely spread its mighty roots. 
There was found, in pristine state, 
All that men now cultivate. 



'Twas Maipuri, that way roaming 

(Whom some white men " Tapir " call) ; 

From the river's margin coming, 
He observed it first of all ; 

In the woodlands, where it grew ; 

While no other creature knew. 

Daily, through the forest stealing, 
He devoured its fruits which fell ; 

Its existence still concealing : 

What he fed on none could tell. ' 

Men, who saw him fat and sleek, 

Sent forth scouts the truth to seek. 

First, " Woodpecker." He kept tapping 
(From long habit) each old tree. 

Shrewd Maipuri heard him rapping, 
And another way went he. 

But the Rat, with silent toil, 

Tracked his steps — then shared the spoil. 



io6 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE . 

Shared it — till some food, delicious, 
Sticking to his lips was found ; 

And mankind, become suspicious, 
Made him show that feeding ground. 

All exclaimed, " O noble tree ! 

Precious gift of Tamosi ! '' 



Then an oracle commanded — 

" Cut it down ! " — They wondered all ; 
Yet sharp stones, as fate demanded, 

Caused it in ten months to fall ; 
Crashing, thund'ring to the ground, 
While they fly, or tremble round ! 



Then, a fair division making, 
For his field each man provides ; 

Slips and cuttings freely taking 

From its branches, roots, and sides. 

" Gaining thus at once," 'tis said, 

" Precious fruits and daily bread." 



3. THE ROCK AND THE WOOD. 

Pleasant as the breath of morning 
Was the life which all lived then. 

But misfortune came ; a warning 
Of still greater ills to men. 

'Neath the roots of that great tree 

Some a sacred grot could see. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. [07 

Saw they there the Water-Mother 

Bathing in her loved abode ? 
That it was her form, none other, 

Soon the swelling waters showed. 
Men had all been swept away 
By a gushing flood that day — • 

But a rugged rock, befriending 

(By what power none can know), 
Closed the fountain. They, attending, 

Saw it stop the mighty flow ; 
And drew near that rock, which then 
Gave forth oracles to men : 

Saying, " Though I from the waters 

Save you, there may come a day 
When yourselves, your sons and daughters, 

In a flood will pass away. 
Listen, then, mankind, to me, 
That your years like mine may be. 

" In yon wood are spirits dwelling, 

Who will tempt you day by day. 
If you dread the waters swelling, 

Answer not, whate'er they say ! 
You are safe while you obey, 
Heeding well your rock-stone grey. 

"And if age bring evils on you, 

Wrinkled skin, and whitening hair, 
You at will may cast them from you, 

Youth renewing, bright and fair : 



108 . LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

As the serpent glideth clear 

From the slough he scorns to wear ! " 



Time has passed. Deteriorating, 
Men grow careless day by day. 

Till their hearts, long hesitating, 
Voices from the wood obey. 

Heeding what those demons say, 

They despise their rock-stone grey. 

From the grove then comes, beguiling 
(Sent by man's malignant foes), 

Yarrekaru. 1 Men, all smiling, . 
See, as towards the rock he goes. 

None prevent ; whilst he, alone, 

Undermines their guardian stone. 

As the shades of night close o'er them, 
To their hammocks all repair. 

Little reck they that before them 
Stand grim death and dark despair. 

From the grove come, mockingly, 

Cries of " Waters cover me ! " 



They respond, " O friend, we hear them ! " 
Laugh, and turn to slumber on ; 

Till the rush of waters near them 
Terrifies the stoutest one. 

' I-arreka-ru (Acawoio, "Iwarreka"), the monkey. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 109 

And these words, in solemn tone, 
Issue from the outraged stone : 

" Lo ! the swelling floods before you, 

See their waters cover vie I 
Soon they will be closing o'er you ; 

I no more your help can be. 
Yet had you but faithful been, 
Death no man would e'er have seen ! " 



Swell the mighty floods, prevailing, 
Death's approach in them they see. 

Loud their cries, but unavailing, 

" Climb the hill ! " or " Climb the tree ! " 

Tempests rage and torrents flow, 

O'er mankind wild waters go ! 



Yet to three or four is given 
Safety till the floods subside, 

For a " komoo " palm (by heaven 
Made to grow) surmounts the tide. 

All whom that tree does not save 

Sink, as rocks, beneath the wave. 1 



1 There is an episode, usually given here, of a "cocorite" palm, 
which mankind strove to ascend, because its top reached the heavens. 
A poor woman, not in a condition to climb, led the way. When half- 
way up she was turned into stone by terror and exhaustion. None could 
help her, and none could pass over her. All who tried to do so be- 
came rocks likewise. The terrified survivors then climbed the komoo, 
and were saved. 



I ro LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

Thus they — while, round the evening fire, 

All in their hammocks swing. 
Some curious youth might then inquire, 

" Who made some wondrous thing ? " 
" What mighty hand could ever trace 
Those figures on the lofty face 

Of rocks, which now our eyes 
View — near the Orinoco head, 
And elsewhere (they are widely spread) — 

With wondering surprise?" 

And then some western sorcerer old 
Would to the young the tale unfold 
Of him who held high place, we see, 
In Tamanac mythology. 
No hand but his, they think, could trace 
Those carvings of an ancient race, 

Which vanished long ago ; 
Where savage Indians, in their place, 

Now wander to and fro. 



IV. 
LEGEND OF AMALIVACA. 

While the deluge was subsiding 
From some land of unknown name, 

O'er the mighty waters gliding, 
Great Amalivaca came. 

Sailing on where now are seen 

Widespread plains and forests green. 

Ocean waves he had crossed over, 
Sailing in his large canoe ; 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. in 

From that other side a rover, 

Seeking lands and people new. 
Doubtless sent our race to raise, 
Helping men in many ways. 

In the sculptures I am showing, 

Now so high, his work you see ! 
Waters at that height were flowing, 

So he carved them easily. 
Carved them from his great canoe, 
Taught mankind to carve them too. 

Each device and time-worn figure 

Had, of old, its well-known lore ; 
Voiceless all—they spake with vigour 

To the eye in days of yore. 
But our wisest all allow 
None can read their lessons now. 



When the mighty floods were failing, 
And the land again was seen, 

There were not (as now) prevailing 
Widespread plains and forests green. 

Wildly rugged all the ground, 

Then Amalivaca found. 



But his brother gave assistance, 
And by that good brother's aid, 

Overcoming all resistance, 

Smooth and gentle slopes he made. 



LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

Many rocks and cliffs, men say, 
By their power were charmed away. 

Thus the earth for habitation 
Much more suitable was found : 

Then said he, " Communication 
There must be with all around. 

In a forest path or road, 

Each perforce must bear his load. 



" But when a canoe is bearing, 
Heavy burdens light become ; 

So let each man make his ' clearing ' 
Near some stream, and fix his home. 

All around us streams we see ; 

On them let your traffic be." 

Men, who heard him thus advising, 

Said, " Amalivaca, hear ! 
With the falling tide, or rising, 

Easy is our course, and clear. 
We the current then obey, 
Going with it either way. 



" When we pass the tidal power, 
Going up, no help is found : 

Heavy is the work each hour, 
Weariness and toil abound. 

Now exert thy wondrous skill — 

Strive to remedy this ill." 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 113 

Then he spent much toil and trouble 

On great Orinoco's flood ; 
Strove to make its current double ; 

Grand idea — wise and good ! 
But that stubborn stream, they say, 
Would persist in its own way. 

With a double current flowing, 

One side up, the other down, 
We might either way be going 

Swiftly from each little town, 
" Would the river not do so ? " 
Orinoco answered, " No ! " 

Then he strove the tides of ocean 

To the upper stream to bring ; 
But the river, with emotion, 

Said, " You seek a fatal thing : 
If the tide should higher go, 
All will be submerged below ! " 

Water seems a yielding creature, 
Mov'd by passing breeze or shower ; 

None can change its stubborn nature 
Who has not its Maker's power. 

This Amalivaca learned ; 

And from fruitless labour turned. 



When he from this land departed, 
Having done what he could do, 
9 



H4 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE , 



Some with tears, and all sad-hearted, 

Watched his lessening canoe. 
And from that time nevermore 
Comes he to this Western shore ! 



When the black-robed teachers found us, 
We inquired " if they had seen 

Him, who left such marks around us, 
Who had our Great Teacher been ; 

Who those high rocks sculptured so ? " * 

And we grieved when all said, " No ! " 



The Caribs, in their conq'ring hour, 
Had reached the zenith of their power. 
A few years pass ; and then we see 
Those who were near the Caroni 
Beneath the monks live peacefully ; 
Till revolution shatters all, 
And in the crash those missions fall ! 



1 Humboldt, who records the legend of Amalivaca, considers those 
rock-carvings to be " traces of an ancient civilisation, which may have 
belonged to an epoch when the tribes, which we now distinguish by 
various names and races, were still unknown." 

Whether the mystery attached to those rude sculptures will ever be 
solved, even in part, it is at present impossible to say. In the interest 
of science, it is desirable that a collection of photographs of the most 
remarkable — not only on the Orinoco, but (if possible) from the Rio 
Negro to the Corentyn — should be made and compared. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 115 



LEGEND OF MANAROWA. 



Sweet is his Essequibo home :, 
Yet still Mandrowa will roam 

To gain more power and fame. 
Though, from that river's sources — south- 
To Dutch plantations near its mouth, 

The tribes all fear his name. 

From Orinoque to Corentyn, 
Fighting and plund'ring he has been, 

The bold Mandrowa ! 
The Indians round him own his sway, 
And slaves, as tribute, to him pay : 

All, save the Tarumd. 

They on that stream above are found ; 
But he, to reach them, must go round, 

Ascending the Rewa. 
For the great Essequibo Falls, 
Never yet passed, like mighty walls, 

Confront Manarowa. 

The chief has pondered long, and said 1 , 
" Those Tarumas we must invade, 

And take them by surprise. 
O'er those grim cat'racts we will haul 
Our light canoes ; and on them fall, 

As coming from the skies ! " 



il6 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

Now he has scaled one wat'ry wall, 
Where a small island in the fall 

Precarious footing gave. 
With toil they hoist and carry o'er 
Their craft ; which float where none before 

E'er danced upon the wave. 

With that great fall they scarce have done, 
Ere they come to a greater one. 

No footing there is found. 
Their chieftain says, " We now must clear 
A pathway through the forest here, 

And drag our vessels round." 

Thus they, still toiling day by day, 
O'er falls and rapids work their way 

With labour most severe. 
They pass the mouth of Cuyuwine — 
Some woodskins are before them seen ; 

" The Tarumas appear ! " 

The rocks are high, the Caribs nigh, 
No power is theirs to fight or fly ; 

They sink beneath the tide. 
The Caribs line each rocky shore, 
But those poor Tarumas no more 

Will be by them espied ! 

" Have we," the chief exclaims, " thus far 
Come through such perils to make war 
On an amphibious race ? 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 1x7 

Themselves and woodskins they now hide, 
In caverns deep beneath the tide : 
And thus elude our chase ! " 

Abandoning that river then, 
The Carib chieftain leads his men 

By land, to hunt their prey. 
Returning homewards (says our tale), 
With captives, to the Dutch for sale, 

By a less dangerous way. 



To all on Essequibo known, 
The tale had to a legend grown, 

Of that " amphibious race " 
Eluding him, " who ventured o'er 
A path no mortal man before, 

Or after, dared to trace ! " 

Thus they, for near one hundred years : — 
A white explorer * then appears ; 

Who to the Taruma 
Crosses, o'er every dangerous fall, 
Giving that highest, worst of all, 
Its name — " Mandrowa." 



II. 

The rule of Holland passed away, 
"Stabroek" 2 now owns the British sway. 
Manarowa has come 



1 Mr. C. B. Brown, 1870. * The present Georgetown. 



ii* 'LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF TftE - 

The British governor to see, 
With his red'coated soldiery, 
And hear the fife and drum. 

Stout Caribs, chosen from his band, 
Attendant on their chieftain stand, 

Each with his feathered crown, 
Red paint, and scarf, of cotton made 
(Six yards), o'er back and breast displayed, 

With tassels hanging down. 

The governor receives him well ; 
For one is there the tale to tell 

From Aruabisi shore ; 
" How Arawaks and Caribisce 
Had both prepared to break the peace, 

And fight it out once more. 

" But when the British magistrate 
Had called their chiefs — to mediate 

At ' Henrietta ' there, 
All Caribs, by Manirpwa, 
Were ordered (and his word was law^ 

From fighting to forbear." 

Twas so. An aged man told me, 

" When he made peace, I went to *£e • 

(Though then a little. thing). 
His stately form I viewed with awe. 
And white men said, ' Manarowy, 

The Caribisi King ! '" 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 1 19 

In Demerara 'twas the same ; 
When he before White rulers came, 

The savage he could hide. 
Young officers, prepared to laugh, 
Found him no object for their " chaff," 

But calm and dignified. 

Some wished for an experiment, 
And gained the governor's consent 

To test the Carib's nerve. 
A well-rammed cannon, placed near by, ". 
Was, without warning, fired, to try 

If he would shrink or swerve. 

It startled some of them (the " bang " 
Shook the whole house with fearful clang) ; 

Manarowa was calm. 
Nor limb nor muscle moved he then. 
The governqr said, "Gentlemen, 

For nerve — who bears the palm ? " 

Loaded with gifts, see him return 
(Allies of white men such can earn) ; 

And his glad tribe behold 
A crescent on his breast appear, 
Not silver, such as " captains " wear — 

Manarowa's is gold! 

Yet glory is but for a day, 
Prosperity will pass away, 
Old age must still come on. 



120 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

And when Great Britain, with a frown, 
Viewed the slave-trade, and put it down, 
His business was gone. 

(Then to the governor, a slave — 
A Carib — for a present, gave, 

As chiefs of old would give. 
Refused, he clave the young man's head, 
Turned to his men, and sternly said, 

" Let no more captives live ! ") 

And when, for such, a sale was found, 
In Surinam, upon new ground ; 

Manarowa was dead. 
Small-pox and rum consumed his clan ; 
He saw them dying, man by man ; 

Grieved, and his spirit fled ! 



CONCLUSION. 

The remnant of his once great clan, 

Which held its head so high ; 
Then withered, as by deadly ban, 

Brazilians forced to fly. 
For they an English teacher heard, 
And learned from him the Saviour's word. 

They came to Georgetown with their grief, 
For who such grief could hide ? 

And there I saw their youthful chief 
Walk by his pastor's side, 

With that broad crescent on his breast 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 12 1 

His grandsire wore of old. 
In sad procession came the rest 

And their sad story told. 
Macusis mingled with the band, 
All driven from Macusi land. 



And here it boots not to relate 

How war almost befell ; 
Nor that good Christian teacher's fate, 

Which mission records tell. 
His work and he have passed away ; 
Both will be found another day ! * 



On other rivers Caribs live ; 

To whom we long have sought to give 

The knowledge of our Lord. 
And courteous they have ever been 
To us amidst their forests green. 
Some think their ancient ways the best, 
But many Christians are, professed, 

And learn the Saviour's word ; 
Which taught and held in Christian love 
(That gentle power — all powers above) 
Is mightier than their club of old, 
Wielded by warriors strong and bold ; 
More piercing than their arrows keen, 
More glorious in its triumphs seen, 

Than white man's conquering sword ! 

1 Rev, T. Youd. Founded Pirara Mission, 1838. Driven from it, 
1839. Died (at sea), 1842. 



'" PART IV. 



CONTENTS OF PART IV. 

PAGE 

Introduction ■ 125 

I. Mythological Legends 126 

The First Man and Animals. 

1. Primitive State 126 

z. The Monkey's Exploit 127 

3. Mishaps _ 131 

4. End of Primitive State 133 

II. Historical and Warlike Legends 135 

Their War with the Caribs. 

1. First Inroad of the Caribs 13S 

2. The Surprise on the Cuyuni 137 

3. Siege of the Fortified House 135 

Civil Strife. 

1. The Aged Friends 14Z 

vi. The Massacre and the Pursuit 143 

3. The Duel 146 

4. Blood Feuds and Dispersion 151 

III. Kanaima. 152 

Blood Revenge (1) 155 

.. (2) 158 



The settlements of the Acawoio clans extend from the vicinity of Mount 
Roraima eastward to the Berbice, and to the Orinoco on the north. 

Closely connected with them — in language, and probably in origin — are 
their neighbours, the Macusis and Arecunas, with their various branches and 
subdivisions. 

Of the history of those races we know very little beyond what their family 
traditions may supply. Schomburgk thought that the Macusis formerly 
lived on the Orinoco. He states also, on historic evidence, that the Are- 
cunas formerly dwelt on the Uaupes, or Ucayari, a tributary of the Rio 
Negro. All beyond is enveloped in the mist of ages. 




Legends of the Acawoios. 



INTRODUCTION. 

Were that which seems a dream accomplished now, 

And mortal man to tread Rordima's brow, 

He, from that mighty wall, the homes would see 

Of scattered clans — a people wild and free. 

From one old parent stock those races all 

Have sprung, which we the " Kapohn-yamu " call. 



One, whose forefathers were their chiefs of old, 
At my request, their ancient legends told ; 



126 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

Their quaint mythology — (its op'ning page 

Like some sweet idyl of the " golden age "), 

And old-time wars, 'twixt those whose children come 

To find, on mission land, a peaceful Christian home ! 

I. 

MYTHOLOGICAL LEGENDS. 

THE FIRST MAN AND ANIMALS. 

I. PRIMITIVE STATE. 

First, my Acawoi narrator 

Told how beasts and birds were made; 
How the Mighty, their Creator, 

Gave them laws to be obeyed. 
Made them of one speech to be, 
Bade them live in unity. 

That there might be no oppression, 
Man was made, and placed o'er all. 

That first man, of wise discretion, 
" Makonaima's son " we call. 

Just, as well as kind, was he : 

All obeyed him lovingly. 

Ere the sun's bright rays were burning, 
All dispersed in forests near ; 

With the cool of day returning, 
Glad his loving call to hear. 

, Each one of his food would bring ; 
' Homage paid to man — their king. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 127 

No great trouble or disaster 

Could oppress them or annoy ; • 
For the man, their gentle master, 

In their good placed all his joy. 
Surely, we no more shall see — 
In this world — such unity. 



Then, 'tis said, great Makonamia, 

Made for them a wondrous tree, 
Capp'd with clouds, like high Roraima, 

Bearing fruits abundantly — 
Every kind — the meed to be 

Of their love and loyalty ! 

2. THE MONKEY'S EXPLOIT. 

What the Caribs may tell of that wonderful tree, 
With our own native legend would mainly agree ; 
But we say that " Ahkoo "' the noble tree found- 
That our first man alone brought it down to the ground, 
And the animals helped him in planting around. 

For the beasts and the birds were industrious all, 
Till " Iwarreka '' (so the brown monkey we call) 

1 " Ahkoo," the agouti, or acouri. This little animal takes the part 
which, in the corresponding Caribi legend, is given to " Maipuri," 
the tapir. The tree itself, the source of all cultivation, is the same in 
both ; and the monkey, though in different ways, releases the pent-up 
waters of the flood. 

Though differing widely now, the ancient traditions, as well as the 
languages spoken by these two nations, and some others, now widely 
spread, point to a common origin at some remote period. 



128 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

To the spirit of play 

And sheer mischief gave way ; 
Then he plagued and tormented the rest all the day. 

His work was not done, 

For he thought but of fun, 
And into the wildest excesses would run. 

He grinned when they begged him to let them alone, 
So they to the master complained — every one. 

" He pulls at our tails, 

Or nips with his nails, 
And will bite us severely when any trick fails." 

So the master passed sentence on that wicked elf — 
" Iwarreka, leave us, and work by thyself; 
It will keep thee from mischief to go to yon spring, 
And thence, in a basket, fresh water to bring." 



When the tree was cut down, the good master soon found 
Swelling waters within : and he saw there abound 
Those fishes which now swim in rivers around. 

" Though more labour for me, 

This a blessing will be, 
To have fishes in fresh water, as in the sea. 
" I will spread them," said he ; " every river shall share : 
For all rivers have equal right to my care." 

Then, addressing the well, 

He said, " Wilt thou tell 
For what purpose thy wonderful waters now swell ? " 
And he found that those waters, ere next rise of sun, 
O'er the world, all around, were preparing to run. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 129 

Then with dexterous hands a wide basket he made, 
Which, inverted, he over the hollow stump laid ; ' " 
And such was its virtue that, while it remained " 

As he placed it, the fountain within was restrained. 

* $ * * * * #1 

Iwarreka, meanwhile, obedience shirking, 

Had given up working, 
And near to the spot at that time he was lurking. 
He, seeing the basket thus placed with such care, 
Said, " The choicest of fruits our sly master hides there. 

I will take while I may, . 

Now they all are away, 
Such a fine chance as this will not come ev'ry day.'' 

So, with a light spring, on the margin he stands ; 
The basket he raises with pilfering hands — 
One moment, no more— for a terrible flood 
Bursting forth, sends him rolling in water and mud. 

With splutter and scream, 

He is borne down the stream : 
A warning to all the dishonest, we deem. 

His screams are sufficient the others to scare, 
They all come in affright, and the master is there ; 
But more for themselves than the monkey they care. 

" See the water ! " they cried, 

" Pouring over the side. 
See ! the fishes are all swimming down with the tide. 
See, the stump and the roots are all forced from the ground, 
And the land disappears as the waters flow round. 
0-man, our good leader ! we cleave to. thy side, 
And thou for the safety of all must provide." 



1 30 - LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE ' 

So the -man leads the way, till before him he sees 
A tall hill, with high rocks, and some cocorite trees. 
Then says, " We may find a last refuge in these. 

You, who rest in a, trefe, 

Here may climb up with me ; 
And in yonder high cave all the others must be." 

So the birds fly up first ; and then up the tree go 
The opossum, coati, and others you know. 
Black monkeys and brown soon the master surround, 
All striving to get farthest off from the ground. 
There the queer spider monkey, with long limbs, is seen, 
*' Sakuwinki's" lithe form, and his fur olive green ; 
The red-bearded one, which " Arowta" 1 we call ; 
The marmosets small — and, in fact, monkeys all, 
There sit, in the palm, to be kept safe from harm, 
With their tails round their neck, curled, to keep them- 
selves warm. 

Such a rain then succeeded as none before knew, 
Nor has such been experienced by me or by you. 
Fierce lightning, loud thunder ; no sight of the sun 
Till three or four nights into one night had run. 



The man sat with patience, for, do what he would, 
He knew that he never could stay that great flood ; 
But he let fall the seeds of the cocorite tree, 
To tell, by the splash, where the water might be. 
He at length found it lower ; at last it seemed gone ; 
Then they ate of the palm-fruits, and welcomed the dawn. 



" Arawata, " in the Caribi ; Spanish, " Araguato." 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA, 131 

. , i, 

3, MISHAPS. 
Thus the man, beasts, and birds were preserved, as we see, 
Though cold, wet, and hungry, of course they would be. 
But some met with troubles, of which, sages say, 
Their children bear tokens to this very day. 

And first, the " baboon, " as your Creoles now call 

The great howling monkey, the reddest of all. 

His voice, we are told, ere he climbed up that tree, 

Was more pleasant to hear than his person to see. 

He began first to roar, as he felt his heart fail, 

When those waters were wetting his feet and his tail, 

And he knew they would drown him if they should prevail. 

With his cries sore distressed, 

All began to protest, 
But he louder and louder his terrors expressed. 
Though his throat did not burst with the strain of those 

cries, 
It thai grew to be twice its original size ! 
And its shape we may see when his sons meet our eyes. 

v: # * * %. * * 

The man bore up bravely, our old legends say, 
But his flock, grown unruly, gave trouble that day; 

Few cared to obey, 
And each, like the monkey, desired his own way. 

He bade all keep their places till he should have found 
If danger awaited them on the damp ground ; 

And the trumpeter bird 

With the others then heard, 
Yet he would not from getting down first be deterred. 



132 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 



" Yahgahmi, beware ! " said the man, with a frown, 

As into a nest of fierce ants he flew down. 

Alas, for the bird ! for that ravenous swarm, 

Ere the master could capture him, did him great harm. 

Each leg was a stick 

(Though once fairly thick), 
For those ants had deprived it of all they could pick. 

Having cleared off the ants, the long-suffering man 

Said, " I'll kindle a fire, if I possibly can." 

The sticks which he carried, though not kept quite dry, 

Would, by friction incessant, yield fire by and by. 

It was kindled at length ; and then, while he looked round 

To see if of fuel some kind might be found, 

The " marudi " z pecked up the red coal from the ground. 

And away the bird flew, 

So that no one then knew ; 
But, in time, his misfortune they plainly could view ; 
For his throat, much inflamed, took a fiery glow 
From the coal he pecked up (for an insect) below. 

'f *K 'i~ ■?» *fi »t» 

The man looked for his fire ; and before him then stood 
The first alligator, come forth from the mud. 
That reptile was then well-conducted, they say, 
And had come his respects to the master to pay. 
But the rest, who disliked him, said " He took the fire ! " 
And the man, cold and weary, gave way to his ire. 
Forcing open his mouth, to search there (he was wrong), 
Found his tongue in the way — and he pulled out the 
tongue ! * 

1 A bush fowl, called by the Acawoios " Okura." 

2 The tongue of the alligator, previous to this calamity, is supposed 
to have been long and flexible. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES 'OF GUIANA. 133 

O sad were the mishaps of that fatal day — 

The reptile, disgusted, went (tongueless) away; 

And from that time made war on all creatures, they say. 

He never could need a memento of wrong, 

When he thought of his huge mouth, bereft of a tongue. 



4. END OF PRIMITIVE STATE. 

Then the birds and beasts, rebelling, 
Soon forsook their guardian mild ; 

Pride of freedom in them swelling, 
In the forests all went wild. 

There their children bear, we see, 

Tokens of their ancestry. 

Though no ants their limbs assail now, 
Thin-legged " trumpeters'' are bred,; 

On bright embers none regale now, 
Still marudis' throats are red. 

Alligators — wanting tongues — 

Show (and share) their father's wrongs. 

Still red howlers loudly bellow, 
(As their father did from fear) 

Night and morn ; each horrid fellow 
Frightens all weak creatures near. 

Monkeys, still by mischief led, 

Like their sire, a " ducking " dread. 

Free as air then roved those creatures ; 
(Save their wild notes, all grown dumb), 



134 • LEGENDS 'AND MYTHS OP TH£ 

Till they saw, with savage natures, 

Beasts of prey and hunters come ; 
Felt their bloody, cruel reign, 
Wished their guardian back again. 



Wondrous deed and strange adventure 

Of that good man I could tell ; 
But their length might meet your censure, 

So I cease while all is well- 
Yet must say that every day 
Bad men sought the good to slay. 

Envy made their hatred stronger : 
He was forced to leave them there. 

Yet, when they were sufTring hunger, 
Sent for them his bread to share. 

They, partaking of his food, 

Sought again to shed his blood ! 

Then, a precipice ascending, 
On that cliff immense and high 

(With a faithful few attending), 
He was seen beneath the sky. 

Evil men he left below, 

Here to suffer want and woe. 

And he left no track behind him, 
All who sought to climb would fall ; 

None could follow there to find him, 
'Twas like high Roriima's wall ! 

Nay, since none now know its name. 

Some may think that cliff the same. > 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 13$ 

II. 

HISTORICAL AND WARLIKE LEGENDS. 

THEIR WAR WITH THE CARIBS. 

Seek you to know the story of our race ? 

Its origin no living man can trace. 

We only know our ancient dwelling*place. 

My ancestors once dwelt, our legends say, 

Where Masaruni cuts his rugged way 

From mountains, where stupendous rocks abound. 

By falls prodigious, to this lower ground. 

North of that river my forefathers dwelt , 

In days of old, and no great evils felt. 

'Twas by the Caribs they were forced to flee ; 

Though small the Carib gain, as you will see. 

That race then lorded it o'er all the land, 

And all the other tribes had felt their hand. 

Not yet our Acawoios, who were sure 

That they, 'midst rugged mountains, dwelt secure. 

1. FIRST INROAD OF THE CARIBS. 

Great was the horror, when a cry 
At night proclaimed the Caribs nigh ! 

They came, a num'rous train ; 
And ravaged through the neighb'ring land, 
Where our bold brethren made a stand ; 

Some Caribs there were slain. 
Nought could their comrades' wrath assuage, 



136 .LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

Who killed their captives in their rage ; 

Then, seeing boys remain, 
They maimed some, and some impaled, 
To show their vengeance had not failed. 



Our warriors met, an angry train, 
That ere the Caribs came again 

They might for them prepare. 
And our old chief said, " Brethren, see ! 
'Tis here their next attack will be ; 

This place must be our care. 
Help me this house to fortify 
With palisado, strong and high, 

Tha,t we may keep at bay 
Those murderers, until you come 
With men from ev'ry distant home 

To sweep them all away." 



'Twas done. All joined to fortify, 
With palisado strong and high. 

Then the far-seeing chief 
Said to his neighbours, " There must be, 
For us, and for each family 
• Whose danger causes grief, 
From this house down to yon ravine, 
A passage which cannot be seen — 

A passage underground." 
They made it, working day by day, 
Some dug, some bore the earth away ; 
While others propped the roof, they say, 

To make it safe and sound. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 137 



2. THE SURPRISE ON THE CUYUNI. 

While they were all assembled there, 
A breathless scout bade them " Prepare ! 
For Caribs now are on their way, 
They come, the whole of us to slay ! " 

Then' said the chief, "Who could have thought 
Of such good news as now is brought? 

Since all are here to-day. 
Arise ! we need no longer talk ; 
We'll save the Caribs half their walk, 

By meeting them midway ! " 

Our warriors to Cuyuni go, 

And from its banks behold the foe 

Coming before the breeze. 
Their .frail, but numerous barques draw nigh; 
Our men with hate those foes espy ; 

Yet close amidst the trees, 
They hide themselves and see them land. 
Their foes, reclining on the strand, 

Then eat and take their ease. 
No scout ; no watch ! They know no fear, 
Nor think a deadly ambush near ! 

Hark, that fierce cry 1 As up they start, 
At each man flies a fatal dart : 

One half their death- wounds bear. 
The others, with a dreadful cry, 
At once to their flotilla fly ; 

Their weapons all are there I 



138 .LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

No valour can regain the day, 

Death falls in every blow ; 
Their men will for no mercy pray, 

And ours no mercy show. 
Soon, half in water, half on land, 
Two hundred corpses line the strand. 

Our warriors, bloody from that fight, 

Then up the river go ; 
To bathe in water clear and bright. 

For there clear waters flow, 
Though with dead bodies — sickening sight- 

And blood, defiled below. 



3. SIEGE OF THE FORTIFIED HOUSE; 

Again the Caribs, strong and bold, 
Returned, as our old chief foretold ; 

Who, speaking to his men, 
Said, " For each warrior we have slain, 
Be sure, when they shall come again, 

The Caribs will bring ten. 
And I, to meet them, can rely 

On none but you, who live near by," . 

It was so. When the foe drew near, 

To help him he saw few appear. 

" This place is lost," the chieftain said, 

" But they shall surely pay 
Full dearly, with their warriors dead. 

For what they get this day ! " 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 159 

Then to the women : " Ye shall live ; 

Wait till the fight is high, 
And foes engaged, then, when I give 

The signal, quickly fly ! 
Fly through the tunnel's friendly shade, 
Fly silent through each forest glade ; 

Utter no timid cry ! 
Thither we soon shall follow you, 
But first, what this small band can dp 

'Gainst numbers — we will try 1 " 



The Caribs to the assault drew nigh 
And scanned the place with curious eye, 

But saw their leaders fall. 
From bulwarks strong swift arrows flew, 
How fatal soon those Caribs knew — 

Tipped with " wourali " all ! 

To storm the place, forth from the bush 
Came their best men with furious rush. 
Their shocks soon made the timbers shake, 

Which some began to hew. 
Those who an entrance strove to make 

By climbing, our men slew ; 
Yet still the place they tried to take, 

The many from the few ! 

Some dug beneath the wooden wall, 
And made a hole through which to crawl ; 
But those who entered that way, all 

There entered but to die ! 
Amazed at such resistance, then 



140 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

The Carib chiefs' called off their men 

Not to retreat or fly — 
But said, " Our warriors brave are slain 
By foes who still untouched remain. 

A safer course we try ! " 

Then flaming arrows swiftly poured 
Upon the loop-holed sides of board, 

And that thatched roof on high. 
Soon roof and sides were in a blaze, 
And they their joyful shouts could raise 

Of "Victory!" the cry. 

They burst the enclosure, waiting there 
The shrieks of agony and fear. 
Had any wretch rushed forth in pain, 
They would have thrust him in again. 
But quiet, save the fiery roar, 
, They found all things remain. 
Our men had gone down through the floor, 
And soon would reach Puriini's shore, 
Not to return again. 

The Carib warriors then perceived 
Their hopes of vengeance all deceived 

The fire in vain might roar — 
The flaming house burned to the ground ; 
But no charred skeletons were found. 

The passage — covered o'er 
With burning timbers — none could heed. 
All said, " 'Tis sorcery indeed, 

Such as none knew before ! " 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 141 

The chiefs then — while the numerous dead 
They buried — to their warriors said, 

"Brave Carinyach, give ear ! 
Demons unhurt can warriors slay, 
And heavy is our grief this day, 

Our loss of men severe. 
We have no wounded. All are dead ! 
Some were but scratched, yet life has fled. 

No longer we stay here ! " 

So when our warriors came, they found 
But blackened ruins on the ground : 
And many new-made graves around, 

Filled with the Carib dead. 
Then our men followed on their track, 
But they delayed not, hastening back. 
Nor chief, nor warrior, then would stay; 
So to this day our people say, 

"They burned the house — and fled !" 



CIVIL STRIFE. 
I. THE AGED FRIENDS. 

We kept away the foreign foe ; 

Yet from ourselves were doomed to know 

An evil greater still. 
And that great evil to our race, 
We to one man's transgressions trace, 

His hatred and self-will. 



14? LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

On the Puruni, loved of all, 

Dwelt one whom we will " Kod " call j 

Too long his other name. 
A chief was staying at his home, 
A friend from Masaruni come, 

In rank and years the same. 

There the loved guest fell sick and died ; 
And Koe"s fortitude was tried 

The heavy grief to bear. 
With his old friend two sons had come : 
When:they were gone he left his home, 

And went to live elsewhere. 

The two young men, who went their way, 
At sunset on the second day 

To Masaruni came. 
They told their elder brother there, 
And had his furious wrath to bear, 

Reproach and bitter blame, 

" Our father there is dead, you say ? 
Then Ko£ took his life away 

By pois,on or by charm, ! 
If I am chieftain, here this day, 
My warriors shall with me straightway 

Avenge this grievous harm." 

Then long the younger brothers prayed, 
To turn him from his wrath, and said, 
" Koe" is not to blame : 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 143 

He grieved when our good father died J 
If you assail him, you provide 
For all deep grief and shame 1 " 



Still he with causeless anger burned, 
And would not from his wrath be turned, 

And so — our troubles came ! 
Ekahruwa, so he was called, 
From no fierce crime would shrink appalled, 

But breathed forth death and flame. 



2, THE, MASSACRE AND PURSUIT, 

" Alas ! why are we captives here ? 
Why forced to bear, by fate severe, 

The plunder of our home ? 
Why have we seen our fathers slain ? 
No Caribs sweep the land again— 
From our ovun race this bloody stain 

And t misery have come!" 



Five youthful maidens thus bewail 
Their heavy lot : until words fail, 

And tears alone remain. 
But their stern captors cry, " Beware ! 
And patiently your burdens bear, 
Or you the bloody fate shall share 

Of those before you slain ! " 



144 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

Ekahruwa, by sorcery led,: 

Had vowed to cleave the hoary head, 

As a most righteous deed. 
Of Masaruni men a band, 
The desperadoes of the land, 
Hastened to march 'neath his command, 

With secrecy and speed. 

And they to Koe"s place had come : 
There, finding he had left his home, 

Stern was their leader's eye. 
The neighbours spoke, he would not heed, 
But said, " Has he escaped indeed — 
The hoary wretch I doomed to bleed? 

Then you for him must die ! " 

So cruelly those men he slew, 

And would have killed the women too : 

Then said his men, " Refrain ! 
Ten men this day we've helped you slay ; 
It is enough — we will not stay. 
Take now the girls and spoil away, 

And hasten home again ! " 



Some of their number nevermore 
Shall see wild Masaruni's shore ; 

For far and wide have spread 
Tidings of that flagitious deed, 
And all Puruni men make speed 

To view their slaughtered dead. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA, 145 

Young men to save the maidens fly, 
And every forest path they try, 

Like dogs to hunting bred. 
And when the murderers' track is found, 
They shout the news to all around ; 
Then on in silence, save one sound, 

Their rapid Indian tread. 



'Tis evening of the second day, 
The ravagers are on their way ; 

They hear a deadly groan. 
The hindmost falls, and his death cry 
Warns them that some dire foe is nigh : 

And soon that foe is shown — 

For arrows rattle through the bush, 
And arme"d men with furious rush 

(To captives welcome sight ! ) 
Dash forth, and set the maidens free, 
Who now their hateful captors see 

In swift and headlong flight. 
Each for himself will now provide, 
And though their chief would stem the tide, 

None dare await the fight. 

Then to his foes he calls, " Draw nigh 
One at a time to fight ; and I 

The whole of you will slay ! 
Which of you can compete with me 
In swiftness, strength, or archery, 

In sport or bloody fray ? 
ji 



146 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

" Now hear, Puruni people, all ! 
Nine men I've seen around me fall, 

By your sharp arrows slain. 
Put them against the men I killed ; 
Still is. my vengeance unfulfilled, 

And I must come again. 
I come — and that old man shall die ; 
If him you screen, or aid to fly, 

None living shall remain ! " 

The threats Ekahruwa had made, 
The arrogance he then displayed, 

Left them astonished quite : 
When, darting through the forest glade, 

He vanished from their sight. 
No living foe they then discern, 
And soon the cheerful watch-fires burn ; 

The maidens rest all night. 
Then, with the spoil, all homeward turn, 

Glad of the morning light. 



3. THE DUEL. 

Ekahruwa soon came again, 
And at his back a numerous train 

From red Roralma's wall. 
They came to shed that old man's blood : 
Puruni men against them stood, 

Prepared to stand or fall 
In his defence. While, man by man, 
Our countrymen of every clan 

Came, and the chieftains all. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 147, 

The chiefs to mediate drew near, 
Called on the aggressor to appear, 

And asked him what he knew. 
" No evidence," said he, " I show ; 
By dreams and secret arts, I know 

That ke my father slew." 

" It matters not what you may say,. 
My men support me. here, this day; 

They all believe as I. 
I stand here with my numerous band ; 
K.06. must perish by my hand. 

Or I myself will die ! " 

The old man's family then said, 

" Think not that you his blood can shed, 

While we alive remain ! 
We are prepared with you to fight ■ 
Singly, and thus defend the right, , 

Upon this grassy plain." 

Then said the other, " Fight and die ! 
Yet in his blood shall Koe" lie ! " 

He paused. For forth there came 
The man whose blood he longed to shed ; 
The old man with the good white head, 

Whom none but he would blame. 

He said, " O Kapohn-yamu all ! 
No man for me shall fight, and fall 
By this proud boaster's hand ! 



148 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

I here forbid my friends the fight : 
This hand, though weak, may do me right ; 
A fair field now command ! " 



Him no entreaties could dissuade. 
" Tis better thus to die," he said, 

" Than see my people slain." 
So each, — with bow and arrows keen, 
And club, — is placed upon the green. 

Few there from grief refrain — 
When the old man, upon the field, 
Lays down the club he once could wield, 

But ne'er shall wield again, 
They see him but one arrow take, 
And, till his foe should onslaught make, 

There tranquilly remain. 



Ekahruwa begins the fight : 
Shifting his ground from left to right, 

His well-aimed arrows fly. 
Yet nothing by their flight he gains, 
For well that aged man retains 

The keenness of his eye. 



Some with his bow he puts aside, 
From others swerves, and they go wide ; 

Till, with a savage cry, 
The strong man says, " My arrows sent 
Are from their course by sorcery bent ! — 

My club I now will try." 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 149 

Swift he comes on, with fell design : 

But midway checks his speed. 
He sees the sting-ray's deadly spine * 

On the opposing reed. 
And as he notes behind the reed 

The glance of that firm eye, 
He for the first time doubts indeed 

Which of the two must die. 



He then retires, and shifts his ground ; 

Firm the old man remains. 
The foe makes feints, and circles round ; 

He still his place retains. 
From side to side the foe may fly ; 

He " covers " him with steady eye. 



Once more Ekahruwa retires ; 

Pauses ; regains his breath. 
Then cries, while rage his soul inspires, 

" To one, or both, come death ! " 
Straight he comes now, with flying bound ; 

The arrow leaves the string ; 
One piercing shriek thrills all around, 
The strong man lies upon the ground, 

Reached with his last death spring. 



1 Arrows thus pointed are believed by the natives to inflict greater 
agony than any other weapon; and the terror they inspire is often 
heightened by superstition. 



'i 5 o 



LEGENDS AND MYTHS' OF THE- 




Shot through the breast, he groans and dies ; 

The chieftains all draw near ; 
Where, o'er the corpse, a brother sighs, . 

Then says, " All men, give ear ! 
I stand to clear this old man's name, < 
Though it be to my brother's blame. 



" I well know how my father died, 
And often have I vainly tried 
.. ., To stay this growing ill. 
Yet fpr, my brother came to fight, " 
For.'.though'his deeds were far from right, 
He was my brother still I ■ 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 151 

" He now is in fair battle slain : 
And ere we home return again, 
Listen to me, Puruni men, 

To all of you I call ! 
My brother did to death consign 
Some of your men, in number ten : 
While of his men you killed but nine. 

Himself you've now seen fall ! 
The deaths are equal. Let each side, 
If any wrong remain, confide 

In these good chieftains all. 
My brother's corpse I bear away ; 
Peace be between us from this day ! " ■ 



4. BLOOD-FEUDS AND DISPERSION. 

The wise young chief a peace had made, 
And for a time the mischief stayed ; 
Yet civil strife was but delayed ; 

At length its fury came. 
Men saw war-parties raging go, 
'Twixt plain and mountain, to and fro : 
Till none security could know, 

All dreaded blood and flame. 



Our family went north, they say, 

Since they their brethren would not slay ; 

And crossed the hills ; till, far away, 

Barahma they could see. 
Some sought the Demerara Fall, 
The Arawaks there welcomed all, - 



152 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

And gave to them a warrior tall, 

Their guide and chief to be. 
The Caribs thence had swept away 
An ancient race, as old men say : 
But our men kept all foes at bay, 
And lived there peacefully. 

At length some warriors order made 
With those who in their country stayed : 
One sturdy chief made all afraid : 

" Piapu " (stump) his name. 
But bad men then Kandima sought, 
And secretly their murders wrought. 
For never can such men be brought 

Their bloody feuds to blame. 



III. 

KANAIMA. 



From the base of high Rordima 
To the widespread Eastern sea, 

Votaries of dread Kandima 
Track their victims secretly. 

Deadly vow must each fulfil, 

Real or fancied foe to kill. 

He who that dread vow is taking, 
Family and friends must leave ; 

Wife and children all forsaking, 
No discharge can he receive. 

Still around his victim's way, 

Hovering night and day to slay. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 153 

If the victim, warned of danger, 

To some other place should fly, 
Soon th' assassin, though a stranger, 

Will to that retreat draw nigh. 
Patiently he bides his time, 
Waiting to commit the crime. 

Stealthily each step he traces, 

Hiding till he strikes the blow. 
Poison in the mouth he places 

Of his victim, lying low. 
Then, if found with swollen tongue, 
None will know who did him wrong. 

When the grave has closed upon him, 

The destroyer hovers round : 
Dread Kanaima's spell is on him ; 

By it he must still be bound, 
Till he pierce, with pointed wood, 
Through the grave, and taste the blood. 

Stern Kandima thus appeasing, 

Who withdraws his direful aid, 
All his horrid influence ceasing 

When that ofFring has been made. 
Uncontrolled, the votary then 
Goes, and lives with other men. 

One, who passed us on the water, 1 
Had his victim lately slain ; 

1 Archdeacon Jones and myself, on the Upper Demerara, in 1865. 
That "Kanaima" murderer, we found, had followed his victim and 
friends from the vicinity of Roraima to Georgetown and back, killing 
him on his return. - 



154 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF TH'B 



There, triumphant, fresh from slaughter, 

He was hast'ning home again. 
Feathered crown adorned his head — 
Bright red spots his skin o'erspread — 

Spots, to show that, nightly ranging 

(So their sorcerers declare), 
He, into a jaguar changing, 

Could his victims seize and tear. 1 

As the " were-wolf " of the East 

Prowls, on human flesh to feast. 
.* * . * * * 

Should the victim 'scape him living, 

Or, if dead, be borne away ; 
He, no horrid 'off ring giving, 

Finds Kanamia on him stay. 
Still the spell upon him lies ; 
Mad, he wanders till he dies. 

One, who sank with forests round him, 

To our Mission hill was borne ; 
First, an ocelot, which found him, 

Horribly his head had torn. 
Head and hands he raised in pain, 
Scared the beast, then sank again. 

Sank — for life no longer striving, 
Christian Indians found him then. 

Arawaks, his strength reviving, 
Bore him to his countrymen. 

Healed and fed, Kandima still, 

Christians all he vowed to kill ! 

1 A set of jaguar's claws, hung up in a sorcerer's hut, have the same 
threatening signification. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 155 



BLOOD REVENGE. 
1. 

" Even where just law commands it, 
Awful doom is ' Blood for blood.' 

But where private hate demands it, 
As th' avenger thinketh good, 

Bloody work, from sire to son 

Handed down, is never done. 

For some old offence or error, 
For some grave ancestral wrong, 

W-e must live in constant terror— 
For some deed committed long 

Ere we drew the vital breath, 

JVease doomed to cruel death l 
* * * # *' 

From the Masaruhi river 

Wahmoro, good chieftain, came ; 
Hoping thus his name to sever 

From his brother's life of shame. 
Men by poison lost their lives, 
And that brother took their wives. 

Soon, with wives and children, flying 
From his foes, to Wahmoro, 

He found safety, there applying ; 
Yet in his old ways would go, 

Spake of things which should not be 

To his nieces, secretly. 

Following his evil nature, 

' I,' said' he, ' the chief must be. 



156 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 



Men approve my strength and stature, 

You, as wives, shall live with me. 
If your father bar my way, 
Father, brother, I must slay.' 

Deeply Wahmoro was grieved, 

When those words his daughters told. 

Then this message he received 
From his uncle, grey and old, 

' By thy brother doomed to die, 

At the point of death I lie.' 

He (with words which blast like lightning) 
Had addressed old Orubu : — 

' With a man whose hairs are whit'ning, 
What hath this young wife to do ? 

Ill this woman suiteth thee, 

Give her therefore unto me.' 

'Ill it suits,' replied the old man, 
' Thus to give one's wife away ; 

He who seeks must be a bold man, 
Though my hair be turning grey. 

She, who children bears to me, 

Must I give her up to thee ? ' 

Then the bad man said, ' Forgive me, 
'Twas in jest I spake to thee ; 

No annoyance I will give thee, 
Faithful friend I mean to be.' 

Yet, with poison, he, false friend ! 

Brought the old man to his end. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 15? 

Dying, but to vengeance wedded, 

' Wahmoro,' the old man said, 
' Take my bow and shaft spear-headed, 

With them lay my murd'rer dead. 
That sad duty falls on thee, 
Head of all our family.' 

To the chieftain's son, then leaning 

O'er his hammock, thus he said : 
' Take this club ; full well its meaning 

He will know ; then cleave his head. 
Ere he do the sameto thee 
As to others and to me.' 

They, the proffered weapons taking, 

Held them in the murd'rer's view. • 
Stern he eyed them, never quaking, 

Though his doom full well he knew. 
' Strike ! ' said he, " for Orubu, 
/ shall have avengers too ! ' 

Swift his household, armed, to save him, 

On the two assailants pressed ; 
But the wound that arrow gave him 

Nailed one arm across his breast. 
By the club he then was slain, 
Fiercely battling on the plain. 

Vainly his brave sons, defending, 

Two young striplings at his side, 
As they saw their sire contending, 

O'er his body fought — and died ! 



I5§ .LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

Neighbours then, who saw that fray, 
Bade the chief the whole to slay. 

' Heard ye not his threat ? Take warning ! 

Slay his broods ere they can slay.' 
But the chief, such slaughter scorning, 

Bade each mother ' not delay.' 
' Here,' said he, ' you cannot stay ; 
Rear your sons — but far away.' 



II. 

" Years rolled on, still coming, going, 
Then the impostor' summoned all. 

Said that he ' the Lord ' was showing, 
' Christ, on whom the white men call.' 

Wahmoro's whole family, 

With their tribe, went forth to see. 

Disappointed, and returning 

To their fair Barahma home, 
After God their hearts were yearning, 

Ttll they said, ' Once more we'll roam 

' In 1845, all the Acawoios, and many Caribs, went to that man, 
near the river Cato. We were unable to stop the movement. They 
were so numerous that food could not be got, so the imposture collapsed 
under the weight of too great success. The man was not an Indian, 
and his ultimate object was never known. 

To " Capui " (the moon), one of the leading Acawoios, he gave a 
" commission " as from the Lord. It had a. leaden seal attached, and 
was written in hieroglyphic characters, invented, of course, by himself. 
Those were the days of." Joe Smith's" early Mormon successes, and 
our impostor seemed to imitate him as far as he could. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 159 

To Bowruma's giant tree : 
'Neath its shade our rest shall be.' 

Simple teaching there was given 

To three races, dwelling near, 
Of that Lord, who came from heaven ; 

Each, in its own tongue, could hear. 
We besought that we might have 
That which you to others gave. 

In our tongue, through kindred nations, ' 
Printed truths then wide we spread. 

Men (drawn by the illustrations) 
Came from Masaruni head. 

Came from fair Cuyuni banks, 

Learned to pray and give God thanks. 

Others then Christ's Church were rearing ; 

Your good bishop, chief of all, 
Went with us, the red cross bearing, 

Past the Demerara fall. 
Went as far as he could go, 
Where Berbice — where Wai'ni — flow. 

Macusis and Arecunas, 

Tribes to whom our tongue is known, 
Came to us with Patamunas, 

Showing how that seed had grown. 
Still they came, inquiring train ; 
With them children of the slain. 

Came his sons, now tall of stature, 
Came his grandsons, active band. 



160 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

Sorcerers said, ' Revenge is nature. 

We will guide some vengeful hand. 
They who strive Christ's words to spread, 
Now shall suffer for the dead.' 

One, from Wahmoro descended, 
Seemed to bear a special doom ; 

Stealthy foes his steps attended, 

Dangers round him still would loom. 

When he sought a distant home, 

Thither would the assassin come. 

Hunting once, he ceased his labour, 
Tired, beneath a tree to stand; 

From behind — a deadly neighbour — 
Sprang ' Kandima,' club in hand. 

From the club and knife he fled, 

Ere that foe could strike him dead. 

Swift he fled (who would have tarried ?) 
Found his foe run swifter still ; 

Empty was the gun he carried, 
How could he expect to kill ? 

Yet he turned upon the foe, 

Struck, for life, one random blow. 

As he swerved, his foeman, springing, 
Aimed the death-blow — missed his aim j 

And the gun-stock, swiftly swinging, 
Full against his body came. 

Prone he fell, but was not dead : 

Twice the other struck — and fled. 

Oh, what else in that great danger, 
Could the destined victim do ? 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 161 

You would strike if some fell stranger 

Sprang upon, to murder you. 
And, like me, would grieve, I know, 
From the hour you struck the blow ! " 

«P -I- "i* •$■ 'P 

Wan and haggard were his features ; 

Telling his own secret woe. 
Brave he was, but hunted creatures 

Evermore expect a foe. 
Many live in constant fear, 
Thinking a " Kanaima " near. 

Counsel, which to him was given, 

Here I need not tell indeed. 
Sweet the lesson brought from heaven, 

Not to "break the bruised reed :" 
Taught by Him, who all the opprest 
Calls, to "come" to Him and " rest" 



PART V. 



CONTENTS OF PART V. 

PAGE 

Introduction 166 

Legend of the Bahmoo and the Frog 167 

,, ,, Haiarri Root 172 

„ Great Serpent's Skin 173 

"Various Legends 175 

The Sorcerer's Daughter 176 

The Demarena 178 

Origin of the Amazons 180 

The Ancient Legend (1) 180 

(2) 181 

(3) 183 

. .. (4) 184 

The Kaniama Father 187 

Legends of the Sky ... 188 

Oroan 189 

Serikoai (i) 191 

( 2 ) 19 2 

(3) 194 

(4) 196 

(5) 198 

The Old Man's Fall (i) 2do 

>. ,1 (2) 201 

Conclusion 206 







'*.... the wild torrents roar 
As we haul the boat o'er." 



1 66 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 



Fanciful Legends. 



INTRODUCTION. 

Hoist again the red cross ! Let us voyage once more 

Where the wild torrents roar, 

As we haul the boat o'er : 
And our red men all point as they paddle away, 
To where the grim cayman is lurking for prey, 
Midst the sandbanks and rocks by the shore. 

We encamp ere the sun quits the evening sky, 
Or the night-birds flit by 
With their strangely-weird cry : 
And our Indians join in our evening prayer, 
Make their camp-fires and sup — to their hammocks 
repair, 
And tell tales till the moon riseth high. 

Oh, strange are the legends in which they delight ! 

Some tell how each sprite, 

In the " merrie moonlight," 
With his comrades (as animals) joins in the dance. 
Such are not malignant, though sometimes, perchance, 
Human beings they sorely affright. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 167 

Of some pillar-like rocks, which the traveller sees, 
They will say, " They were trees 
Which once waved in the breeze." 
And of others, like men or strange animals shown, 
Say, " They once lived and moved, but are turned into 
stone, 
Having failed the Great Spirit to please ! " 

And he who would win those wild people should know 
How their strange legends go, 
And how their thoughts flow. 
His teaching more readily they will receive 
When they find that he knows what their old men 
believe ; 
And thus his good seed he may sow. 



BAHMOO AND THE FROG. 
" Oh, what mean these croaks, like a concert of frogs, 
Such as we, oftentimes, near our marshes and bogs, 

May hear at still evening's close ? " 
•' Tis the chorus to one of our popular tales, 
Levelled at a division of race which prevails, 

And pretending to show how it rose." 

THE LEGEND. 
" Come with us, O Bahmoo, to hunt the huge frogs, 
Which are found nowhere else in our rivers and bogs : 
Good food ; though in size they approach the bush- 
hogs : 
Some excellent sport you may find." 



168 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

Thus our young men addressed 

Their friend Bahmoo, a guest, 
Who had come to their " place " of adventures in quest, 

And, perhaps, of a wife to his mind. 
For, as you may know, our young men often rove 
A long distance in search of a girl they can love. 

And now these young hunters set forth on their way ; 
Each one with his weapons and ornaments gay. 

" Take a cudgel, O Bahmoo ! " said they, " if you go, 
For those creatures are sturdy, and take a hard blow." 

Then answered Bahmoo, 

" I leave weapons to you, 
And tell you beforehand what /mean to do. 

The first frog that is found 

Upon yon marshy ground, 
I will jump on his back, and will twist his neck round, 
And so kill him without more ado ! " 



Now the chief of those frogs was a spirit, they say, 

Who o'erheard Bahmoo's boast, and forthwith, in the way, 

Full of fun, near the river, he squatted or lay. 

There he seemed half asleep ; while around him awoke 

A deafening chorus of croak upon croak. 

Our young men, well used to it, were not afraid, 
But Bahmoo half shrunk from the row those frogs made, 
It was such a wild hullabaloo. 

As from each monstrous throat 

Pealed the long rolling note ; 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 169. 

And he heard it resound, 

Far and near, all around, 

" Boro-ohk," dying off in " boro-00 ! " 

When the boaster looked grave, it was thought a good joke, 
And his comrades enjoyed it. Although no one spoke, 

He knew they were laughing aside. 
So he ran at that first frog, and sprang on his back, 
And, to twist round his head, threw his arms round his. 
neck, 
And then — found himself in the tide ! 
For the frog-chief, returning his ardent embrace, 
Said, " Come, my dear friend, with me, home to my place, 
Just to see it, if not to abide." 

Then he sprang off the ground, 
And with wonderful bound 
And a splash, that was heard a long distance around, 
They plunged in where the deep waters glide. 

Bahmoo tried to escape, but the frolicsome sprite, 

Which possessed that huge frog, in his paws held him tight ; 

And, when they emerged from below, 
He said, " Mount on my back, it is much the best way, 
And we will enjoy ourselves this pleasant day, 

As over the river we go. 
We will sing, as we swim along, merry and gay : 
And my people, as chorus, shall join in the lay, 

Each chanting his loud ' boro-00.' " 

So each neighbouring frog lifts his head from the tide, 
And the others respond from the banks, far and wide ; 

At the voice of their king 

They all merrily sing — 
" Boro-ohk, boro-ohk, boro-00 ! " 



170 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

But meanwhile, Bahmoo's comrades, pray what have they 

done? 
Well, at first I must say that they thought it no fun 

To see their friend caught by the frog. 
But as soon as they saw him upon the frog's back, 
With loud peals of laughter, they cried, " Twist his neck, 
And bring him here dead as a log. 
Then, when he is dead, 
And you've done what you said, 
Of all our bold hunters we'll make you the head, 
Our champion in forest and bog !" 



'Twas severe, I must own ; 

But 'tis very well known, 
That to braggarts who fail little mercy is shown. 
And so Bahmoo, when mocked by the frogs' " boro-oo," 
Heard his comrades laugh loudly, and join in it too. 



At length he arrived at the opposite shore ; 
The frog had sung merrily all the way o'er 

(Such a jolly old frog none e'er knew). 
" You see I have carried you safely," said he. 
" How pleasant to swim in such good company ! ' 

Then o'er his head Bahmoo he threw, 
Saying, " Though it be painful to part, I must go, 
lor your people are killing mine yonder, I know. 

Adieu, my good Bahmoo, adieu ! " 



He then dived below ; the man saw him no more, 
But remained there alone on that desolate shore. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 171 

When the young men had finished their frog-hunt, they 

hailed 
for Bahmoo to swim back ; but entreaties all failed 

To draw him from that other side. 
He dreaded their laughter, and would not again 

Adventure himself in the tide, 
Lest that frog he should meet. So he had to remain, 

And there for himself to provide. 

*' And that is the reason," our old people say, 

" Why his children are separate from us this day." 

*' His children ? Why, where could Bahmoo find a bride ? " 
" Well, most likely he'd found one ere quitting our side, 

Who would not quite approve 

That the man of her love 
Should be there day and night quite alone. 

She might not have a boat, 

But a ' woodskin ' will float, 
Which her woman's wit would most surely provide ; 
And, paddling, herself, she would be at his side. 
Woman's love greater wonders has done, 

And few things, we find, 

Will deter woman-kind, 
When once it has thoroughly made up its mind, 
As the wisest of Indians own." * 

The Moral. 

When tempted to boast of what you " mean to do," 
Pray remember the frog, and vain-glorious Bahmoo. 



1 The frog chorus in this legend, when taken up by the native audi- 
tence, all admirable mimics, has a most amusing effect. 



172 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 



LEGEND OF THE HAIARRI ROOT. 

An old man, who often caught fish in the river, 
Would take his boy with him his fortune to try ; 

And the father, with wonder, observed that wherever 
The boy swam about, there the fishes would die. 

But as, after cooking, he safely could eat them, 
He took the lad with him to bathe day by day : 

Till the fish knew his plans, and, resolved to defeat them, 
They made up their minds the young swimmer to slay. 

They dared not attack him, of course, in the water ; 

To venture there near him would never have done. 
But they chose an old log as the scene of the slaughter, 

Where he, after swimming, would bask in the sun. 

There the fish which had spines all sprang rapidly o'er him,. 
And each struck his spine in the youth as he lay ; 

But, worse than all wounds from the others before him, 
And fatal, was that of the deadly sting-ray. 

When the father his son through the forest was bearing, 
The dying youth saw his blood drop on the ground ; 

And he said, " Father, watch for strange plants here ap- 
pearing ; 
My blood will take root, and avengers abound." 



Thus was found the Haiarri, which, washed after bruising, 
In pools or small streams, makes the fishes our prey. 

Think on what the fish gained, when the roots you are using,. 
Or when anger tempts you a foeman to slay ! 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 173 



THE GREAT SERPENT'S SKIN. 

I. 

The birds with mankind once their forces combined 

An immense water serpent to slay, 
Who was fond of all creatures — and those he could find 

Would embrace, in his own pressing way. 
Beasts and birds, human beings, with him all went down ; 
So the men came to kill him from each little town. 
Their gay feathers and paint made a glorious show, 
And each warrior was eager to strike the first blow ; 

While the birds came to help in the fray. 

They all promised his skin to whoe'er should begin, 

And make him come out of his pool ; 
But every warrior they asked to step in 

Said he fought " upon land — as a rule." 
Then came forth the cormorant chief, who could see 
In the deep the snake's neck round the root of a tree. 
Darting down, he drove through it an arrow he bore 
(Which had a line tied to a tree on the shore), 

Emerging triumphant and cool. 

Then, with many a shout, the men capered about, 

And began very gently to haul ; 
Then more strongly ; but still the snake would not come 
out — 

He seemed fixed there, like any stone wall. 
When forced out at length by his horrible wound, 
His tail made the warriors all scamper around, 
While the birds in wide circles seemed whirled by the wind. 
But he had to give in ; and was finally skinned, 

'Midst the shouts and wild cries of them all. 



174 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

That struggle took place on the Cako, men say, 

Where the snake's length is marked on the rocks to this day. 

II. 
When the cormorant chief claimed the skin as his prize, 
The chief of the warriors affected surprise, 
And said, "We might give you the skin, as you say, 
But how are you going to bear it away ? 

Just try, if you please ! " 

" With much pleasure and ease ! " 

The bold water-bird said ; 

Then he lifted the head 
As a sign to the others, who knew what he meant, 
And swooped down on the skin with a rapid descent ; 
Each seized on its margin, beginning to fly, 
And the skin, like a banner, went streaming on high ! 

But the warriors, disgusted, used very strong words, 
And have, since that time, become hostile to birds. 

III. 
The birds flew to a place quite secluded, and there 
Their leader said, " Comrades, this spoil we will share : 
So let each take the part which he happened to bear." 

Now the skin was most brilliant, red, yellow, and green, 
Black and white, in such patterns as never were seen. 
So, delighted, each bird took what happened to come, 
Which he placed on his shoulders to bear safely home. 

Then a wonder ensued ! Birds of soberest hue 
Became of those colours,white, yellow, and blue ! 
Parrots then were first seen dressed in red and in green, 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 175 



ieen. 



And macaws in such plumage as never had b 

Scarlet, purple, and gold ! But what more need I say, 

When we see them fly past us in beauty each day ? 

As it happens with men — when brave warriors who toil, 
And go through all the danger, get least of the spoil— 
Even so — to the champion, who thus adorned all, 
The snake's head, with its sombre tints, happened to fall. 
But he seemed quite contented, whatever befell, 
Saying, " For an old diver it does very well ! " 



VARIOUS LEGENDS. 

While resting from our toil by night, 

We hear strange stories told ; 
And tales of beasts and birds delight 

Young hunters, keen and bold. 
From whom each wild bush note is heard, 
For well they mimic beast and bird. 

Of him who on the cayman's back * 

Crossed and recrossed the tide ; 
Or one who from a jaguar's track 

Would never turn aside, 
They tell ; or praise to him afford 
Who caught great snakes with slender cord. 2 

1 "Bernau's Missionary Labours,'' p. 167. 

* The tiger slayer, a Carib, and the snake-catcher, an Arawak, are 
not mythical personages. They belonged to the last generation, and 
both became Christian converts. The former would attack any jaguar, 
and cleave his skull with axe or cutlass. Of the skill and daring dis- 
played by the latter in the capture of a kolokonaro snake, with only a 
cord and forked stick, the writer was an eye-witness. 



176 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

* * V * * 

Of mermen or mermaidens wild 

We hear, in legends grave : 
How handsome youth, or maid, or child, 

They draw beneath the wave ! 
Or snatch them from the bank above, 

Some say, " through envy," some, " through love." 
***** 
Some tell us of Peaima's * hair, 

And him who dressed his head ; 
But stripped : then on it, raw and bare, 

Poured pepper seeds — and fled. 
" With growing peppers crowned," they say, 
" The monster sought the man to slay ! " 

Wild is the tale — its sequel long, 

Yet Indians laugh to find 
The man outwit, with lying tongue, 

The monster's simple mind. 
'Tis ever so. In heathen lore 
Are heathen morals — and no more. 



THE SORCERER'S DAUGHTER. 

The chief of our sorcerers stood by the water, 

No mightier wizard existed than he ; 
And he looked with compassion upon his fair daughter, 

As love-sick and sad as a maiden can be. 

1 An Araidai, or goblin of the woods, who had become dissatisfied 
with his coarse and matted locks, and wished them to be made like 
those of human beings. Pahndun, a captive, undertook to gratify him, 
with the above result. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 177 

" Oh, father ! " she cried, " he has no one to cheer him, 
That lonely young hunter — so brave and so free ! 

Make me like to his dog, that I may venture near him ; 
I die for his love — while he looks not on me." 

"Take this skin," he said sadly, "and draw o'er thy shoulders; 

A dog in the eyes of thy loved one to be ; 
Its wonderful magic deceives all beholders ! 

Be rid of thy madness — then come back to me ! " 



Then the young man, beloved of the sorcerer's daughter, 
Would start with four dogs through the forest to roam, 

But would come back with three: for the struggle and 
slaughter 
One never would join in, but always ran home. 

With the sweet eventide to his cottage returning, 
He found the place swept up as clean as could be ; 

Cassava bread baked, and the fire brightly burning ; 
And said, "Some good neighbour has done it for me." 

When they all had denied it, he said, '"Tis some spirit, 
Who, seeing me lonely, thus strives to be kind." 

Then he saw gazing at him that dog void of merit, 
Whose look was so strange that it puzzled his mind. 

The next day, as he the swift game was pursuing, 
He counted his dogs, and he found there but three ; 

Then he said, " Till I find what your comrade is doing, 
I leave you here tied to the trunk of a tree ! " 
13 



178 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

Then — silent and swift — to his cottage returning, 

He found a small crevice — peeped through the thatch 
wall, 

And saw, baking bread on the fire brightly burning, 
The lovely young damsel, whose hand had done all. 

With exercise flushed, all her features were glowing, 
Her form bending lithe in its fine symmetry ; 

As she listened to hear distant barking, not knowing 
That he whom she loved all her movements could see. 

And there hung the charmed skin, the whole secret revealing ; 

He sprang in and seized it with heart light and free ; 
" No longer," said he, " this fair maiden concealing, 

Thy magical charm shall have power o'er me ! " 

And into the flames he then thrust it ; the rather 
That she strove to take it, her beauty to hide. — 

Then she wept. But he said, " Now return to thy father ; 
I follow, to claim thee — my beautiful bride ! " * 



THE DEMARENA. 

Some tell of him, of human birth, 
Who saw in troops advance 

The sons and daughters of the earth, 
And joined their mystic dance. — 

Danced at an elfin maiden's side, 

And wooed her for his fairy bride. 



* From the " Ebesotu " {changed ox transformed), heroine of the above 
legend, the Ebesoana (Arawak family) take their name. 

The names of those families all descend in the female line, and no 
individual was permitted to marry another of the same family name. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 179 

Then said her father, " None would dare 

(No man has been so brave) 
Deep in the earth our home to share, 

Or 'neath the shining wave. 
Dar'st thou ? " "I dare ! " the young man cried, 
" With this fair Demaredu bride ! " 

The chief replied, " So let it be ! 

He must be fond and brave, 
Who dares to join our family 

Beneath the earth or wave. — 
To him and his, but none beside, 

Give we a Demaredu bride ! " l 



1 From the above union, the existing Demarena (Arawak family) are 
supposed to have sprung. They bear, of course, their mother's family 
name; and in ancient days considered it "the correct thing," in 
accordance with the legend, to intermarry solely with their father's 
family — the " Korobohana." 

These latter have a strange legend of their own. They believe that 
they originally came from above the clouds. The weight of a heavy 
woman broke the rope by which they were descending ; and com- 
munication was thus cut off between those who had reached the 
ground and those remaining above. The Great Spirit, pitying the 
latter, supplied them with wings and plumage ; and they came down, 
to colonise the trees above the heads of their brethren — -still privileged 
to live near, and to converse with them, though changed into 
" Koriouka "parrots. 

This legend, though grotesque, affords another instance of the belief 
(which our pages have shown) expressed by various myths, but almost 
universal amongst the aboriginal races of Guiana : of a discent ixoxa. a 
higher region, or state of existence. 



180 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

ORIGIN OF THE AMAZONS. 

(An Ancient Legend of the Inland Mountain Tribes..), 
I. 

Of the fierce " Worisiana " 

(Such their nation's name) 
I can tell the ancient story : 
How their warlike strength and glory 

First began in shame. 

For a chieftain's wife, " To-eyza," 

Faithless dared to be, 
Caring nothing for disaster ; 
Haughty was her lord and master, 

Haughtier was she. 

At the women's place of bathing, 

Thus To-eyza said : 
" Some call marriage a protection ; 
I esteem it base subjection ; 

Better far be dead ! 

" Such as we, by parents given, 

Nought of love can know ; 
All our days we spend in sorrow ; 
'Work to-day,' and 'work to-morrow,' 

Ever ' work ' — and woe ! 

" Spurn with me this shameful bondage I 

Yon black jaguar see — 
See, in that disguise, my lover ! 
Men like him can soon swim over, 

And will set us free ! 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 181 



" Call his name ! Let Walyarima 

Be our signal cry ; 
Ye who seek emancipation 
From your husbands' domination, 

Now behold it nigh ! " 

II. 

But three men saw Walyarima 

From a neighbouring wood, 
Saw and heard, and told the story — 
Told their chief, " To-eyborori," » 

How the matter stood. 

To the women, on the morrow, 

Calm, the chieftain said, 
" Toilsome hunting is before us, 
Hunger may be hanging o'er us : 

Make cassava bread." 

When for roots they all departed, 

To the stream he went ; 
Bade some striplings there " keep moving," 
While, concealed, the rest (approving) 

Heard his stern intent. 

Those who bathed cried, " Walyarima ! " — 

Called the hated name, 
Spread their long hair on the water ; 

1 "Walyarima" is the name of the animal whose appearance was 
assumed by the lover while swimming the river. To-eyborori" and 
"To-eyza" are titles, denoting authority, masculine and feminine 
respectively. The proper names seem to have been lost in the lapse of 
jears. 



1 82 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

While each bow lay near for slaughter ; 
Walyarima came. 

As he came, the chief, to meet him, 

Dashed into the tide, 
Sent his mighty arrow through him ; 
While the others, swimming to him, 

Smote him — as he died. 

Grimly, his remains they bore then 

To the women's shed — 
To the ridge within, suspended, 
Left them (for a taunt intended) 

Hanging overhead. 



Came, in Indian file, the women : 

Each her burden bore ; 
Sternly then their husbands eyed them, 
Shrinking from the sights beside them, 

On the roof and floor. 

Last of all came in To-eyza : 

Blood fell on her hand, 
Firm she stood, her high head rearing 
(E'en the chief admired her bearing) 

Beautiful and grand ! 

Then said he, " We go a-hunting ; 

Speed, and make the bread — 
Bake to-night : we cannot tarry, 
Bread for five days we must carry." 

" Be it so,'' she said. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 183, 

" Bring the meat ; and strong paiwdri, 

More than e'er before ; 
We your wives will then provide you, 
And, that night, will dance beside you, 

If we dance no more ! " 



III. 

In the heart of proud To-eyza 

Burned a raging flame ; 
For that drop of blood inspired her, 
And the demon power, which fired her. 

On the others came. 

" For revenge our hearts are burning — 

All our hearts,'' said she. 
" Savage insult men provide you ! 
Ask no questions — I will guide you ; 

You shall all be free ! " 

* * * :|: * 

From his hunting came the chieftain ; 

Laden were his men. 
Beasts and birds they brought home twenty, 
Smoked or fresh. Then all was plenty — 

All was feasting then ! 

For the women of paiwari 

Had abundant store — 
All the men had drunk, and rested ; 
Till the thirsty ones requested 

To be served with more. 

Then a calabash each woman 
Filled up to the brim, 



1 84 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

To her husband meekly handed, 
(So To-eyza had commanded) 
Fatal draught to him ! 



She had mixed cassava juice there, 

Bringing death to all ; 
Soon, in agony appalling, 
Vainly for assistance calling, 

Down the warriors fall. 



" Now rejoice ! " exclaimed To-eyza ; 

" Women, ye are free ! 
Nevermore shall husbands rule you, 
Beat, oppress, and then befool you, 

If you follow me ! " 

Some, with boys, had fled ; the others 
Through the midnight hour 

Danced, with simulated gladness ; 

Every bosom filled with madness, 
By the demon's power ! 



IV. 

Winding through the woods in order, 

See a female band, 
Hammocks, food, and weapons bearing, 
lor a weary march preparing, 

To some distant land. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 185 

To their leader, tall To-eyza, 

All obedience pay. — 
Sometimes fighting, sometimes flying, 
Mainly on their bows relying, 

They must win their way. 

Many a discontented woman 

With them gladly goes. 
They proclaim emancipation ; 
Call themselves the " Woman's nation ; " 

Husbands treat as foes. 

Driving off the men, or slaying, 

To their wives they say, 
" With your daughters we receive you ; 
If you keep your sons, we leave you 

Here, with them to stay." 

On they march, and others follow, 

Swelling thus their band; 
O'er those females madness creeping ; 
Like an epidemic, sweeping 

Women from the land. 
* * * * * 
But, meanwhile, the poisoned victims 

Kindly friends had found ; 
Shuddered at the bones before them, 
Scared the vultures brooding o'er them ; 

Placed them in the ground. 

Then they followed up those women, 

Made the hindmost fly ; 
Swiftly chased to overtake them, 
But their captives none could make them, 

They preferred to die. 



•*" 



^ 



180 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

Soon they came to dark green forests, 

Saw their bravest fall ; 
In their blood the strong men weltered, 
Shot by female archers, sheltered 

By each leafy wall. 

Then they paused ; a wise man saying, 

" What have we to gain ? 
Of what use to man is woman, 
Who regards him as a foeman ? 

Let them march again ! " 

So those women, still proceeding 

Towards the setting sun, 
Passing safely through all dangers, 
Made a settlement as strangers, 

All their journeys done. 

There their haughty queen, To-eyza, 
Gave them maxims clear : 
• " We will welcome men as lovers, 
f If they come as errant rovers ; 

None must settle here. 



" Of their children born amongst us, 
Send the boys away ; * 



1 This agrees with the old legends, told to Raleigh and others. But 
many Indians now say that the male infants were always destroyed, 
and their fathers warned not to return, on pain of death. 

With regard to the subject in general. The expeditions for war and 
plunder, so common amongst the South American tribes in former ages, 
would often draw away all the males in a district capable of bearing 
arms, and sometimes they never returned. The women, left by them- 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 187 



But whenever girls we bear them, 
Joyfully we all must rear tliem ; 
Our successors they ! " 

Ages since have passed ; their children 

Still observe those laws, 
Tell the tale of Walyarima, 
'Midst the mountains of Parima : 

Still maintain their cause. 



THE KANAlMA FATHER. 

As a " Kan^ima tiger " * dire, 

Old Tounawai was seen, 
Lurking, with eyes that shone like fire, 

selves, drew together for mutual defence ; and being, in those days, all 
well trained to the bow, would (like the women of the Caribi islands) 
defend their homes and children fiercely against all comers. 

Such a state of things — said still to exist in some wild regions of that 
vast continent — will account for the tales of Orellana and others, of 
their fights with Amazons. 

It does not, of course, account for the murder of husbands, and utter 
rejection of marital authority, in the legend before us. Whether that 
tale ever had any foundation in fact, it is impossible to say. Wild and 
unnatural as it is, it has deeply impressed the minds of the Aborigines ; 
and the writer has, in his researches, come upon various legends (both 
tragical and comical) founded on the scarcity of wives, after their (sup- 
posed) terrible Exodus. 



1 The spotted " arua " (or harua) of the Arawaks, spelt jaguar by the 
Spanish discoverers, is commonly called "tiger" by the colonists who 
frequent the bush. It is called " tobi " by the Waraus, and " kaikusi " 
by the Caribs and Acawoios. 



LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

Amidst the branches green. 
His son came hunting there alone, 
His " old-time arrows '' tipped with done. 

Without success the monster sprung ; 

An arrow pierced his jaw ; 
As from his mouth the weapon hung, 

He broke it with his paw. — 
The young man, as Kaniima fled, 
Picked up his splintered arrow-head. 
* * * * * 

Next day came home the guilty sire, 
And said, with many a groan : 

" O son, my mouth seems all on fire ! " 
The son drew thence a bone. 

Which fitted (so the legend said) 

Into that splintered arrow-head. 

Then spake the broken-hearted son : 
" We leave thee here this day ; 

I have a wife, while thou hast none : 
To gain her thou wouldst slay — 

Slay ! — with the dread Kandima charm, 

A son — who never did thee harm." 



LEGENDS OF THE SKY. 

Soft moonbeams tip the trees above, 
And our red camp-fires light the grove 
Beyond ; each glade seems, like the tomb, 
In deep, impenetrable gloom, 
Save where the fire-fly sheds his light, 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 189* 

Pale flashes, quickly lost in night. 
On. every side strange sounds are heard 
From insect, reptile, beast, or bird ; 
But louder than each forest noise, 
Resounds the chat of men and boys. 

Some talk of stars, so bright and fair 
From east to west, soft gliding there. 
Some — of the meteors flashing high, 
Like arrows flaming through the sky. 
And some, perchance, recall to mind 
A tale of heaven's most awful kind, 
Whose gleaming light trails far behind. 1 

And now, our camp-fires waning low, 
Anew replenished, brighter glow ; 
While from the trees large dew-drops fall, 
Which our red friends " star-moisture " call. 

Then, as fresh light springs from the fires, 

Of some grave elder one inquires : 

" O father ! tell of Oroan, 2 

The friend of darkness, foe of man." 



LEGEND OF OROAN. 

Then tells he how fierce " Oroan, 
The dark-browed enemy of man, 
Seizes the sun on high. 



1 The great comet of 1843. 

* The great demon of darkness, "who causes eclipses. 



igo LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

And strives to quench the solar fires, 
Till, scorched and blackened, he retires, 
Some other time to try." 

Or how, " upon the moon his power 
He turns, to rend her, or devour. 
Then her bright features none can trace, 
For blood besmears her beauteous face, 

And darkens all the sky ; 
Till from the tribes of men below, 
Loud cries and prayers upwards go : 
' Cease, Oroan, to work us woe, 
And spare the light on high ! ' 

" They rouse the spirits of the air, 
Who to the sufFrers' aid repair, 

And force the fiend to fly. 
Her darkened face from blood they clear, 
Till its bright beams again appear, 

And nations cease to cry." 



Then, while the constellations bright J 
Fill the high heavens with glorious light, 
One, pointing to the eastern sky, 
Exclaims, " Behold Serikoai ! " 

1 The native ideas respecting the constellations differ widely from 
ours. For instance, the Southern Cross is supposed, by many clans, to 
represent a "paui " bird resting on a tree. The star, Beta Centauri, is 
a hunter stealthily approaching it. Alpha Centauri is the hunter's 
torch (or firebrand), held behind him, so as not to alarm the bird by its 
glare. Some call it another hunter, lighting the first. Other constel- 
lations have narratives connected with them; of these, "Serikoai," 
the legend given here, is the most interesting specimen. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 191 

LEGEND OF SERIKOAI. 
I. 

In days when spirits talked with men, 

And all the world was young, 
Wawaiya, lately made a bride, 
Saw a young tapir by her side 

Walk quietly along. 

" Oh, what art thou," the woman said, 

" Thus walking here by me ? " 
" They call me ' Wailya,' " he replied, 
" With changed form I seek thy side, 

For thou art fair to see ! " 

She, when her husband went to hunt, 

Would to their field repair ; 
And daily, as she went and came, 
Through forest path, it was the same — 

She met the tapir there. 

And pleasantly the creature spoke, 

And well she loved to hear ; 
Till, through his artful, glozing word, 
Serikoai, her once-loved lord, 

Became to her less dear. 

Then boldly the seducer said, 

" Come, run away with me ! 
Tar, far away we both will fly, 
And, where this wide earth meets the sky, 

My country thou shalt see. 



192 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

" 'Tis there I reign in manly form : 
There thou shalt be my bride ! " 
" Alas ! " she cried, " if I should fly, 
My husband, brave Serikoai, 
Would slay us side by side ! " 

"I charm thine axe," the sorcerer said, 

" And it shall speak to thee. 
Heed well what that good axe shall say, 
And see thou do it. That same day 
Thou shalt be safe with me!" 



II. 

" Wawaiya," said Serikoai, 

" Come where our pear-trees grow. 
In yonder old provision ground 
Last month I saw young fruits abound ; 

They must be ripe, I know." 

" I go with thee," the wife replied, 

" But I mine axe must take. 
Whilst thou art climbing in the tree, 
I'll cut such dry wood as I see, 

Our nightly fire to make." 

Then to the sharp'ning stone she went, 

As if her axe to grind ; 
And every time it touched the stone, 
The word " Sahtai," in threatening tone, 

Seemed borne upon the wind. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 193 

" Dost thou not hear, Serikoai, 

The axe here speak to me ? 
Still, as I rub, these words resound, 
Oh ! ' I must cut ; ' or, 'I must wound !' 

What can their meaning be ? " 



" Whene'er an axe is sharpened there," 
Said he, " I hear the same ; 

So let us haste, nor lose the day, 

To idle fancies giving way ; 
Women are oft to blame." 



Resentment then within her burned, 

As with her lord she went. 
That direful sorcerer drew her on, 
And with his charms her heart had gone, 

Till she could not repent. 

Then many ripening fruits they saw, 

Bananas sweet were there ; 
But still the man would climb that tree, 
Where he his fav'rite fruit could see, 

The " avocado " pear. 



Wawaiya, cast thine axe away, 

Bid the enchanter flee ! 
Why do thy handsome features frown ? 
Slay not thy husband coming down ; 

For good and true is he ! 
14 



194 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

Alas ! — inspired by direful charm, 

(The axe its influence knew,) 
She raised her hands to strike the blow, 
The deed is done — the man lies low, 
His leg is clean cut through ! 

She meets his eye, and in it reads 

Wonder and deepest woe ! 
Then hurries from that bloody scene : 
With Wailya, through the forests green, 
And o'er the hills to go. 



III. 

The husband lay, and thought to die ; 
• His life-blood ebbed away. 
A kindly spirit passing then — 
A friend to true and suffering men — 
Revived him as he lay. 

Inspired, the man an eyelash plucked, 

(Upon it was a tear ;) 
He blew it in the air — it flew, 
A little bird of beauteous hue ; 

Then waited, hovering near. 

" O birdie !" said the bleeding man, 

" Haste ! to my mother fly, 
And call my name ! " The birdie knew, 
And straightway to the mother flew.; 

And called, " Serikoai ! " 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 195 

" Why call my son, ' Serikoai ? ' 

Oh, birdie, tell me true ! 
Why dost thou nutter to and fro ? 
Thy meaning, bird, I cannot know." 

Then back the sweet bird flew — 



And swiftly came again the bird, 
Taught by the suff'ring man : 
" Oh, mother ! thy Serikoai 
Is sorely wounded — left to die ! "■ 
Forthwith the mother ran ; 



She ran, and stumbled as she ran, 

(Old age asserts its power) ; 
Yet through dense bush she hurried on, 
To help her foully-stricken son 
In that malignant hour. 



" Oh, loving mother ! art thou come 

Thy dying son to cheer ? 
Better than all fair wives, like mine, 
To whom fond men their hearts resign, 

Is one good mother near ! " 

Then that kind spirit saw their love, 

Propitious from on high : 
To healing balsams added charms, 
Till, saved, in his good mother's arms 

He left Serikoai. 



196 LEGENDS AND MYTHS. 

IV. 

Oh, who is this that wanders on, 

Still searching all the ground ? 
A man of mighty strength he seems ; 
Though pale and worn ; — his keen eye gleams 

On everything around. 

A wooden prop one limb supports 

The shapely leg is gone ! 
Yet, like a warrior armed for fight, 
With bow and club from morn till night, 

He still keeps moving on. 

And every forest path he tries, 

No track there meets his eye. 
For many an eve, and many a dawn, 
Have passed since that false wife has gone 

Who maimed Serikoai. 



The rains, which washed her track away, 

Had left no traces near ; 
No sign where human life had been : 
Till, near some trees, a sprout was seen 

Of avocado pear. 

He scanned the bush all round, and thought 

An opening he could spy ; 
And followed that until he found, 
Another pear-shoot on the ground ; 

Then brighter shone his eye. 




' With bow and club, from morn till night, 
He still keeps moving on." 



LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

His hope of finding them revived, 
And served his heart to warm : 
For she had said who saved his life, 
" A sorcerer hath bewitched thy wife — 
A man — in brutish form ! " 

He thought of her who took those pears, 

And ate them by the way ; 
How rains, which could her steps efface, 
Had caused their seeds to sprout apace, 

And grow as there they lay ! 



v. 

Still, sad and worn, the man went on 

Towards the rising sun, 
And said, " Earth's limit must be nigh ; 
Nearer and nearer is the sky ; 

My task will soon be done." 

He found small footprints of his wife, 

The tapir's, too, were clear ; 
Then saw them both together walk, 
Too much absorbed in cheerful talk 
To think of vengeance near. 

He shot the Wailya through the heart 
Ere he could change his form ; 

Then cut his wicked head away ; 

And all the ground on which he lay 
With his heart's blood was warm. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 199 

Then cried the husband, " He is dead, 
Whose charms bewitched thee sore. 
Return, O wife ; return to me, 
Or through the earth, the sky, or sea, 
I follow evermore ! " 



He cut and smoked the tapir's flesh, 

Then followed up his wife : 
And saw her from a neighbouring hill. — 
A shadowy form pursued her still ; 

The Wailya's — as in life ! 

They fled ; and to the earth's steep edge, 

Drew nigher and more nigh. 
A chasm wide they then could view ; 
Straight o'er the gulf the woman flew 

Into the deep blue sky. 

Her lover followed, and, enraged, 

The husband followed too — 
And, ever moving through the air, 
The chase unceasing follows there : 
As we may nightly view. 

% % :fc # & 

She, as a cloud-like mass of stars, - 
Shines, when the night is clear ; 
The Wailya, too, is following nigh, 
Turning a fierce, though bloodshot, eye 2 
Upon the husband near. 



* The Pleiades. 

2 The Hyades represent the tapir's head. The red eye is Aldebaran. 



200 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 



As, bright with stars, his mighty form 

Seems rising in the sky, 
Shoulders and sound limb glitf ring there, 
With that broad belt he used to wear : 
More faint— the prop which helped to bear 

The maimed Serikoai ! * 



Thus with their legends, grave or gay, 
The hours till midnight pass away. 

Meanwhile we, from our hammocks, see 

The northern constellations rise ; 
While, round the cross, shine brilliantly 

The glories of the southern skies. 
Still croak the frogs, the night-birds call; 

Still chirp the crickets loud and gay ; 
At length we slumber, one and all, 

Till from the east looks forth the day. 



THE OLD MAN'S FALL. 
I. 

From the brow of this hill, 

While all nature is still, 
The roseate dawn we view ; 

As the sweet eastern light 

Decks the vapours of night 
With every glorious hue. 

And the trees are all kissed 

By the low morning mist 
In the forests — now dripping with dew. 

1 The constellation Orion : Rigel indicating the upper part of the 
sound limb. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 



See, the rivers gleam white 

In the fast-growing light, 
Like snow in the new-born day ; 

For the mist covers all 

With its silvery pall, 
Though soon it will vanish away ; 

When the fog and the dew 

Which around us we view 
Shall give place to the sun's glowing ray. 

Yet, though vanishing here, 

It will not disappear 
From the face of Potaro's great fall j* 

Where the brown river breaks 

Into rocket-like flakes, 
Flashing down a precipitous wall. 

There, by night and by day, 

The beautiful spray 
(Oft clothed with the rainbow) is waving away, 

Ever changing — yet lovely through all ! 

It is waving and whirling, 

And gracefully curling ; 
In starlight cold, and the moon's silver ray, 
It riseth for ever — still whirling away. 

And the sun has no power 

At his noontide hour 

To remove that white veil, 

Or cause it to fail 
From the face of the " Old Man's Fall ! " 

1 This great fall is 822 feet in total height, by 369 feet in width. Its 
upper part is 741 feet perpendicular. 



202 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

II. 

"The Old Man's Fall!"— 

Why do Indians call 
By such a strange title that cataract high, 
Whose broad torrent, below, seems to come from 

the sky? 
The Indian legends, as may be made clear, 
Are sometimes romantic, but more often queer. 

And the one we have here 

May be classed with the " queer." 
It was told Mr. Brown, of exploring renown, 
Who discovered that fall as the stream he came dowa 
'Tis the tale which the Indians tell to us all, 
To show why they call it the Old Man's Fall. 

THE LEGEND. 

" Some people of old 

(So our forefathers told) 
Had their village above the great fall. 

One, a feeble old man, 

Passing life's usual span, 
Was half blind, and a burden to all. 

" For, though once strong and fleet, 

His poor suffering feet 
(It might happen to white men or negroes, 

For want of due care) 

Had — burrowing there — 
Some scores of vile vermin, called "chegoes." 

(Some ladies, we've heard, 

Take offence at that word, 

And express it with more or less vigour. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 203 



We would give no offence, 
So, in the same sense, 
Will use " insect," and banish the- 



The old man grew more helpless, and gave them more 

work, 
And the care of his feet more and more they would shirk ; 

Till the young women all, 

And the boys, great and small, 
Said, " Oh ! what is the use ? Let him lie there and bawl ! 
His feet every day are becoming more sore, 
As the insects increase there each day more and more ; 
We give up the care of him ! Mind him, who can ? 
He's become such a troublesome, horrid old man ! " 



What was to be done ? Though they all wished him dead, 

The men were unwilling to cleave his poor head. 

" Let him go to the spirit-land ! " some then would say, 

" The river may take him and bear him away, 

If he still suffer here he must die all the same ! 

We can help him no more, so we are not to blame." 



Then the head men commanded, " Bring now a wood-skin ; 
Put the old man and his little property in ; 

Let nothing remain, 

For we seek no such gain, 
But to get rid of trouble and finish his pain. 
So we send him away the next world to begin, 
But will not send him empty, for that were a sin." 



204 LEGENDS AND MYTHS OF THE 

The young men obeyed. They soon brought a wood-skin, 

Put the old man and his little property in ; 

They then launched him forth. As he swept down the 

stream, 
The loud-growing roar must have seemed a bad dream ; 
One quivering moment — then, over the fall 
Went wood-skin and victim, with " insects " and all ! 



Perhaps just then his countrymen 

Felt they had not done well ; 
And the bell-bird bright in plumage white 

Tolled forth his passing knell. 

It may have been so — 

It was long, long ago, 
And none living now can pretend to know. 

But some Indians say 
(Believe it who may) 
That as over he went 
In that dreadful descent, 
Some power interposed with a kindly intent. 
And, to save his poor bones, 
Man, with wood- skin and freight, were all turned into 
stones ! 

Rocks (the wood-skin and package) are now seen by all, 

Who may visit that fall. 
But where's the old man ? It is not quite so clear 

That he doth appear. 

" He's perhaps washed away. 
Strong currents wear rocks very fast, people say. 



ABORIGINAL TRIBES OF GUIANA. 205 

First his ears and his nose, 

Then his fingers and toes " 
(If we'd faith in the legend we thus might suppose), 
" For the figure, though stone, when thus worn would soon 

go, 
And be borne as fine sand down the rapids below." 

Such are the main points of the legend now told 

By the red men who dwell near that cataract old. 

Will that story be heard while the mist shall endure 

O'er their " Koe-tu'euk," called by us " Kaieteur " ? 

Or will it die out, when pure Indians all 

Shall have ceased to exist near their " Old Man's Fall " ? 



206 LEGENDS AND MYTHS. 



CONCLUSION. 

The old creed of each race in our legends is shown, 
Their belief, while the white man as yet was unknown ; 
While amidst their grand forests no Christian was seen, 
And no prayer rose to God from their foliage green. 

Here the mild Arawak and the bold Caribisce 

(By the gospel of Christ now united in peace), 

The grave Acawoi, and more careless Warau, 

A glimpse of their mythical heroes allow. 

While Macusis and others — but space here would fail 

To name all — have their part in some " fanciful" tale. 

To those who have sent them the faith they receive - y 
Sweet hope of the lowly, and all who believe, 
They here show, in return, that traditional lore, 
Which was all they possessed — they could offer no more I 

In forests primeval, on many a stream, 

'Neath the sun's burning glow, or the gentle moonbeam, 

By the Indian fire, or in that peaceful home, 

Where, to talk with his teacher, the red man would come ; 

'Midst bright mission prospects, 'midst sickness and fear, 

And voyages, reaching their fortieth year, 

The selection was made which is now given here. 

Forgive, gentle reader, whate'er seems absurd 

In each quaint native " Word ; " 
And think kindly of those whose old tales we have heard. 



UNWIN BROTHERS, 

PRINTERS 

CHII.WORTH AND LONDON. 



u. 



¥ 



