n,  tP- 


■£iAv_> 


I  '^   1 


"r/yyvy^. 


'i>Uh'' 


UNIVERSITY  OF   PITTSBURGH 


F258O 

b8^5 
1868 


Darlington  .Alemorial   L,il»iai  y 


/ 


THE 

INDIAN   TRIBES   OF   GUIANA. 


VTHBrcLl. 


MiWiiaiiluiri  UU\ 


mniAN  ;jNakk  r.ATuiiKR. 


TIIK 


INDIAN   TRIBES  OF  (JUIANA; 

THEIR  CONDITION   AND   HARITS. 

1177'//  FESEARCHES  INTO  THEIR  I'Af^T  ll[sTiH!Y.  smEllSTITIoXS. 
LEGEXDS,  ANTIQUITIES,   I.\  Xt,fA(;ES.  ,fv. 


REV.  W.  H.  BRETT, 


.MISSIOXAtiV    IN   CONNEXION    WITH    TllK   SoriF.TV    KOK   THK    Plti  .PAI  AT  <.S   „f  1IIK   ri  SI  I  I 
IN    FOREir.N    PAIITS,    AND    RECTOR   OK   TRINITY    PARISH.    ES-SKQIMH" 


BELL  AND  DALDY,  YOEK  STIJKKT.  COVKXT  CATJDKX 

18GS. 


^ 


^^    o 


LONDON : 

R.    CI.AY,    SON,   AND   TAYLOR,    PniNTER8, 

BREAD   STREET   HI  LI.. 


PKEFACE, 


The  Aborigines  of  Guiana,  wlio  form  tlic  cliifl'  sulijcct 
of  tlie  following  pages,  are  of  no  jxilitieal  inijMtrtaiice. 
The  country  is  indeed  a  good  land  and  ;i  hirge; 
Imt  civilized  man  has  settlccl  on  its  coast,  and  the 
Indian  races,  who  still  possess  the  vast  regions  of 
the  interior,  are  very  scanty  in  nuniher.  Scattt-riMl 
over  tracts  as  wide  as  some  p(»|>ulous  countries  in 
Europe  are  fewer  souls  than  are  usually  sent  into 
eternity  by  civilizcMl  nations  in  the  course  of  one 
campaign. 

Yet  among  those  feeble  tribes  are  foun<l  n-nmants 
of  races  who  were  formidable  opponents  t(3  the  dis- 
coverers of  the  New  World,  and  for  n)ore  than  two 
centuries  drew  the  attention  of  learned  or  adventurous 
Europeans.  And  it  may  be  that  a  slight  glance  at 
their  past  history,  with  such  an  account  of  their 
present    condition,    and    the    eftbrts    made    for    their 


vi  PBEFACE. 

benefit,  as  the  writer's  long  intercourse  witli  them 
enables  him  to  give,  will  still  possess  some  interest, 
— to  those  especially  who  believe  that  it  is  more 
blessed  to  save  than  to  destroy. 

The  writer  takes  this  opportunity  of  thanking 
those  gentlemen  who,  like  himself,  have  taken  an 
interest  in  the  Aborigines  of  Guiana,  and  have  aided 
him  with  much  valuable  information. 


CONTENTS. 


PART  I. 

CHAPTE  \l   I. 

IXTRODUCTORY. THE    COAST    AND    ITS    rurULATIOX. 

PACK 

Guiana  colonized  by  different  European  Nations — Various 
Eaces  inhabiting  our  Province — Introduction  of  Cliristianity 
among  tlie  African  Population — Iliutloo  Lnmigrant.s — 
Chinese — j\[any  Languages  spoken 3 

CHAPTER  II. 

THE    INTERIOR   AND    ITS    INIIABITAXTS. 

Sketch  of  the  Interior  of  Guiana — A  Day  in  its  Eorosts — 
Their  luxuriant  Vegetation — Birds,  Insects,  lieptiles,  S:c. 
&c. — Indians — Their  personal  Appearance,  Eood,  Habita- 
tions, and  Way  of  Life hi 

CIIAPTEli  III. 

EARLY    EXPLORERS    OK    GUIANA,    AND    FIRST    MISSIONS    TO 
THE    INDIAN    TRIBES. 

Indian  Ideas  of  God,  &c.— GT>ject  of  First  Explorers — El 
Dorado — Eirst  Colonists — Their  Contests  with  the  Natives — 
Missions  to  the  Indians  in  French  Guiana,  and  of  the 
Moravians  iu  Berbice  and  Sui-iuam— Iheir  Fate    ....     3G 


CONTENTS. 
CHAPTER  IV. 

THE   ESSEQUIBO    AND    ITS    TRIBUTARIES. 


PAGE 


The  Essequibo — Its  Size  and  Beauty — Bartica,  &c.  — The 
Indian  l^ations  near  the  Coast — The  Macusis  —  Stations 
among  them  destroyed  by  the  Brazilians .55 


CHAPTER    V. 

THE  POMEROOX. 

Indian  Territory — Its  Inhabitants — Tlie  Writer's  first  Recep- 
tion by  and  Sojourn  among  them 69 


CHAPTER  VI. 

THE    ARAWAKS    OR    LOKONO. 

Their  Character— Weapons — -Xame — Division  of  Families — 
Polygamy — Birth  and  Rearing  of  Children — Paiwari  Feasts 
— Funeral  Customs — Chiefs — Law  of  Retaliation — Progress 
— Mode  of  Instruction  —  Indian  Astronomy  —  Use  of 
Pictures — Manners  of  School  Cliildren — Venezuelan  Ex- 
pedition— Visit  to  the  Akawini  Lake 96 


CHAPTER  VII. 

THE    CARIBS,    OR    CARINYA. 

Account  of  the  Writer's  First  Visit  to  the  Country  of  the 
Caribs — -Their  Costume  and  Appearance —  Their  national 
Character  and  Customs — A  Glance  at  their  Condition  and 
Habits  during  the  last  Century — Their  cruel  Wars — Ancient 
Chiefs — Former  Cannibalism 119 


CONTENT:^. 


CHAPTEE  YIII. 

ViaiT    TO    THE    AOAWOIOS. 

PAOE 

Journey  through  the  (/aribi  Country  to  an  Acawoio  Settlement 
— Reception  and  Eesults  of  the  Visit — Description  of  the 
Acawoios — Their  Persons,  Ornaments,  &c. — The  Blow-pipe 
and  Ourali,  or  Arrow  Poison — The  Haiarri,  and  Method  of 
jjoisoning  Fish — Their  roving  Disposition,  and  long  Journeys 
for  Traffic  and  Plunder — The  Small-pox — State  of  the 
Pomeroon  Mission  in  1842 13o 


CHAPTEK  IX. 

WAKAPOA    LAKE    AXD    ITS    NEIGHBOURHOOD. 

Expedition  to  Manawarin  and  Wakapoa — Its  Kesidts — Ma- 
quarri  Dance  of  the  Arawaks  —  Difficulties  —  "  Captain 
Peter's  Church  " — Mosquitoes 14-7 


CHAPTER  X. 

THE  WARAUS  OR  GUARANOS. 

Cabacaburi — Opposition  among  the  Caribs — The  Waraus — 
Unsuccessful  Voyages  and  Journeys  —  Great  and  sudden 
Change — Efforts  of  the  Post-holder  and'the  Indians  .     .     .16^ 


CHAPTEK    XL 

WARAMLRI. 

Conversation  with  an  old  "VVarau — Erection  of  the  Mission 
Buildings — Sickness  of  Missionaries — Extraordinary  Impos- 
ture— Long  Drought — Waramuri  Mission  nearly  destroyed 
by  Fire — Famine — Mortality  by  Dysentery — Progress  of  tlie 
Mission- — Distant  Indians  desire  a  Twicher 176 


CONTENTS. 
CHAPTER  XII. 

TRIALS. 


Paok 


Causes  which  led  to  the  first  Abandonment  of  Waramuri — 
Dangerous  Passage  across  the  Sea — JS'arrow  Escape  from 
Death  by  an  Arrow — Panic  among  the  Caribs  at  the  Pome- 
roon  Station — Its  Abandonment 188 


CHAPTEli  XIII. 

MAHAICONI. 

Situation  of  the  Mahaiconi  —  Expedition  in  1844  —  Great 
Indian  Assembly  and  Maquarri  Dance — Kesult — Gloomy 
Prospects 200 


PART  II. 
CHAPTER    I. 

INCIDENTS    OF    OARIBI    LIFK. 


State  of  the  Caribs  in  1851 — A^isits  to  their  Head-quarters — 
Incidents — Child  killed  by  a  Cougar — Caribi  Man  devoured 
by  a  Jaguar — Subsequent  A-^isits — Quashinikotahpo — Mora- 
tree  Bridge — Impediments  to  Navigation — The  Slayer  of 
Jaguars — An  Acawoio  Clan  from  a  distant  liiver  join  us      .   'IQd 

CHAPTER  11. 

EPIDBMIO     DISEASES. 

]\Iortality  from  Epidemics  :  Small-pox,  Measles,  &c.  —  The 
"  Caribi,"  "  Buck,"  or  Indian  Sickness — Destructive  A'isit 
of  Cholera — Diminished  X  umbers 223 


t'oXTHyrs. 


CHAlTKi;   III. 


UEVIVAL    Ol'    WAHAMl'in    MI.SSIOX. 


PACi: 


The  desolate  ^Mission — EfTorts  for  its  Revival — Arrival  of  jMr. 
AVadie — His  Missionary  Career  and  Services — Severe  Sick- 
ness—  Perilous  and  lonely  Condition — Slow  liccovery  an<l 
Return  —  Relapse  —  Unwilling  Resignation  —  I>eparture — 
Death 230 


CHAPTER  IV. 

rrjoGRESs. 

Indians  take  down  and  remove  their  Chapel  in  one  J  )ay — 
Progress — Superstitions  of  the  "NVarans,  and  Impostures 
practised  on  thom — Their  Habits,  i^-c 240 


CHAPTER  V. 

T  II  K       K  A  r  O  11  X. 

Retrospect — The  Acawoios  of  Barahma  duped  hy  the  false 
Prophet  of  184-0 — Their  Return — Their  Coming  to  us — 
Arrival  of  suspiciousdooking  Strangers — Unexpected  Result 
— Coming  of  distant  Acawoios,  Arecunas,  I\Iaiongkongs, 
Sec. — Great  Gathering  in  1865 — Sketch  of  their  Character, 
<S:c.,  and  of  the  Regions  inhabited  by  them 25r» 


CHAPTER    VI. 

THE    DEMEUAUA. 

The  Lower  District  of  that  River — Places  of  Worsliip  of 
various  Denominations — Its  few  Indian  Inhabitants — Tlio 
Upper  District  —  Arampa — Malali — Visit  to  the  above — 
Incidents 282 


xii  PONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  YII. 

BERBICE    AND    EASTERN    GUIANA. 

PAGE 

The  old  Dutch  Colony  on  the  Eerbice  gradually  abandoned 
for  the  Coast  Lands — Scene  of  the  Moravian  Labours — 
Efforts  to  Christianize  the  Indians  during  the  present  Cen- 
tury —  Missionary  Expedition  to  the  Acawoios  near  the 
Cataracts,  1866 — Incidents — Open  and  healthy  Savannahs 
which  border  the  Berbice. 

Tlie  Corentyn — Indian  District — Indian  Slave-trade — Eeport 
on  the  various  Tribes  on  that  Eiver,  1866 — Orealla. 

Indian  Tribes  of  Dutch  and  French  Guiana 292 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

ABOVE      THE     FALLS. 

Decline  of  the  Aborigines — Desolate  Regions — Paths  from 
River  to  River — The  Country  above  the  Falls  crossed  in 
1839 — Missionary  Expedition  to  the  Acawoios  residing 
there  in  1867. 

Indian  Tribes  near  the  Sources  of  the  Essequibo,  and  on  the 
Brazilian  Border 320 

CHAPTER  IX. 

THE    CHARACTER.    HABITS,     AND    SUPERSTITIONS    OF    THE 
INDIANS. 

Their  Indolence,  Apathy,  Acute  Observation,  &c.  —  Hospi- 
tality —  Drunkenness  —  Polygamy  —  Superstitions  —  The 
Kanaima — Yauhahu  or  Demons — System  of  Sorcery  or 
Piai-ism — The  Orehu — Her  QuaUties,  &c 343 

CHAPTER  X. 

MYTHOLOGY    AND    LEGENDARY'    TALES. 

Legends  of  supernatural  Beings — Kanaima  Tiger  and  other 
Animals  possessed  by  them — Myths  arising  from   singular 


CONTENTS.  xiii 

I'Aci: 

Appearances  in  natural  l)l)jects — Of  tlie  Creation,  i)elug(', 
&c. — Legends  of  the  Acawoios,  ^lacusis,  Caribs,  Tamanacs, 
<fcc.  —  Legends  of  the  Coast  Tribes,  the  "Waraus  and 
Arawaks — Keniarks  on  the  above .'57-'J 

CHAPTETJ  XT. 


Diversity  of  Language  among  the  Aboriginal  Tribes — Other 
Impediments  to  Improvement — Favourable  Results  of  the 
Introduction  of  Christianity  among  them 404: 

CTTAPTKR  XTT. 

THE    SHELI,    MOUNDS    OF    GUIAXA. 

The  Tumulus  on  "Waramuri  Hill — Causes  which  led  to  its 
Excavation — Found  to  consist  of  Shells  and  broken  Bones 
— Human  Eemains — Their  Condition — Search  for  other 
Mounds — The  Governor's  Visit — Incidents — Tumulus  cut 
through  to  its  P)ase — Other  ^Slounds  discovered  and  examined 
near  the  Pomeroon,  "Waini,  c^'c.  —  The  Evidence  of  their 
Contents 420 

CHAPTER  XIII. 

HISTORICAL    SKETCH    OF    THE    INDIAN    NATIONS. 

Difficulty  in  tracing  their  Origin — Timehri  Rocks — Historical 
Traditions — Early  Accounts  of  the  Caribs — Various  Opi- 
nions of  their  Origin — Conflicts  ■with  other  Races — 
Supremacy — Decline — The  Kapohn  and  cognate  Tribes — 
The  Macusi.s,  &c. — The  "Waraus — Tlae  Arawaks — Accounts 
of  early  Discoverers — Their  historical  Traditions — Contests 
with  the  Caribs — Struggles  of  the  Indian  Races  with  the 
early  Colonists,  (fcc 4  44 

CHAPTER  XIV. 
Conclusion 49G 


LIST    OF    ILLUSTRATIONS. 


SNAKK  CATCHFR  {coloured) Fronfi.ytirn: 

INDIAN   SHOOTING  BLACK   TIGER Titlf.-pfKjr. 

SAMBUKA  {coloured) jx/;/'-  31 

THE   COKOKITO    PALM 1]0 

MISSION    CHAPEL,    rOMEROON,    1843 14t; 

5IAQUARRI   DANCE   {coloured) If. 4 

INDIAN    MLSSrON    AT   TOMEROOX,    1S4G I'M 

WARAMi'Ri  0846)  {coloured) 178 

ASSEMBLY   OF   ARAAVAKS   AT   MAHAICONI,    1844 2ri2 

CARIBI    ENCAMI'MEN'T   OX   THE   UPPER    POMEROON  'ill 

COUGAR   SEIZING    CHILD   {cohiurrd) ■1\  \ 

ARECUNA    INDIANS 2(!S 

CORODUNI  {coloured) 3n(; 

TIMEHRI    ROCKS 314 

DEMERAKA    FALLS 33(1 

LANDING    PLACE   ABOVE   DEMERAIIA    FALI,S    (rohmrcd) 332 

SHIELD-WRESTLING 3oO 

INDIAN  SORCERER 364 

ASSEMBLY  OF   INDIANS   AT   WARAMI-|:i,    1866    {rtiloii rrd) 430 

HUMAN    REMAINS    AND    RELK  s 4:'>4,     43S,    43;(,  440 

COMUTI,    OR    WATER-JAR    ROCK  ;     AM>    AIAIIAIIT,    (lit    ni.VM.'s    imcK         .  417 

MAP   OF  GUIANA fidd 


EiniATA. 

I'Mf^o   41,    line   l"),    liii    iDiil  rrnd  or. 
r:i<lo   64,    fool    nut.',    fur  /r>i<l-  na.l  /nir/. 


EI!l;.\Tr^r. 

1'.  (id.  ni>U:firr  l,.")()i(  ,.[  i;,(mh).  rrail  ].")()  or  200. 


THE 


INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 


CHAPTER  I. 

INTRODUCTORY. — THE  COAST  AND   ITS  POPULATION. 

Guiana  colonized  by  diflerent  European  Nations — Various  Eaces 
inhabiting  our  Province — Introduction  of  Christianity  among 
the  African  Population — Hindoo  Immigrants — Chinese — Many 
Languages  spoken. 

Between  the  great  rivers  Amazon  and  Orinoco  lies 
the  extensive  region  called  by  Sir  Walter  Raleigh 
"  that  mighty,  rich,  and  beautiful  empire  of  Guiana," 
and,  by  its  less  enthusiastic  Dutch  explorers,  "  the 
wild  coast."  It  forms  the  north-eastern  part  of  South 
America ;  and  during  tlie  sixteenth  and  seventeenth 
centuries  was  colonized  by  several  European  nations. 

The  Spaniards,  proceeding  up  the  Orinoco,  took 
possession  of  the  western  part,  which  is  now  included 
in  the  State  of  Venezuela.  The  Portuguese  formed 
settlements  in  the  southern  portion,  which  is  watered 
by  the   tributaries  of  the    Amazon,   and   now  forms 

B  2 


4  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

part  of  the  Brazilian  empire.  To  the  provinces  which 
lie  east  of  Venezuela,  and  north  of  Brazil,  the  name 
of  Guiana  has  been  restricted  by  some  recent  geo- 
graphers. Their  area  has  been  estimated  at  from 
150,000  to   170,000  square  miles. 

Cayenne,  the  most  eastern  of  these,  was  occupied 
by  the  French.  The  Dutch  received  from  the  English 
a  fine  colony  on  the  Surinam  (the  capital  of  which 
is  Paramaribo),  and  formed  others  on  the  Berbice, 
Demerara,  and  Essequibo.  The  whole  of  these,  in 
the  early  part  of  this  century,  were,  by  the  fortune 
of  war,  placed  in  the  hands  of  the  British,  who,  in 
1814,  when  Surinam  and  Cayenne  were  restored  to 
their  former  possessors,  retained  the  other  three.  The 
latter  were  afterwards  united,  forming  a  province 
which  has  a  coast  line  of  nearly  200  miles  in  length, 
and  extends  far  into  the  interior  to  the  border  of 
Brazil. 

The  population  of  this  country  has  been  very 
scanty,  compared  with  its  size  and  resources.  Only 
a  narrow  strip  of  land,  the  edge  of  the  alluvial  flat 
which  forms  the  coast  and  extends  some  distance 
up  the  rivers,  is  in  regular  cultivation,  or  at  all 
thickly  inhabited.  This,  being  low.  and  level,  and 
covered  in  front  with  a  thick  grove  of  courida  and 
mangrove  trees,  appears  uninteresting  when  viewed 
from  the  sea.  Tall  chimneys,  however,  appearing 
here  and  there  above  the  bush,  show  the  approach- 
ing voyager  that  it  has  been  laid  out  in  plantations  ; 
chiefly  of  sugar,  which  is  produced  in  great  abun- 
dance by  the  rich  soil  and  tropical  climate. 


THE  (VAST  AND  ITS  POPULATION.  5 

Georgetown,  tlie  capital,  is  situated  at  the  luoutli 
of  the  river  Demerara,  and  on  its  eastern  bank.  Its 
streets  are  mostly  wide,  with  canals  or  drains  on 
either  side.  They  are  rendered  pleasant  by  the  gar- 
dens, and  the  cocoa-nut  and  cabbage-palm  trees, 
which  surround  the  houses.  Those  stately  trees,  with 
others  less  conspicuous,  appearing  in  great  numbers 
among  the  buildings  of  the  city,  give  it  a  handsome 
and  cheerful  appearance. 

In  the  streets  of  Georgetown  many  a  busy  and 
motley  group  may  be  seen,  composed  of  men,  women, 
and  children  of  many  races,  presenting  a  spectacle 
of  interest  to  a  stranger,  who  may  there  behold  the 
native  American,  surrounded  by  people  from  Europe, 
Asia,  and  iVfrica.  There  are  the  Anglo-Saxons,  Por- 
tuguese immigrants  from  Madeira,  Coolies  from  Cal- 
cutta and  Madras,  and  Chinese  from  still  more  distant 
regions  of  the  East.  These,  with  individuals  from 
other  lands,  are  seen  mingled  with  the  Creoles,  who 
form  the  bulk  of  the  population. 

While  looking  on  the  busy  scene,  the  stranger's 
attention  may  be  arrested  by  a  group  differing  in 
many  respects  from  the  others.  By  the  bright  copper 
tint  of  their  skins,  their  long,  glossy,  straight  black 
hau',  and  too  frequently  by  their  very  scanty  clothing, 
may  be  recognised  the  aborigines  of  the  country. 
They  usually  bear  in  their  hands  little  articles  of 
their  own  maimfjicture  for  sale,  such  as  baskets  of 
various  shapes,  bows  and  arrows,  models  of  canoes 
and  Indian  houses,  &c.  Frequently  parrots,  monkeys, 
and  other  animals    are    added  to    their    little  stock. 


6  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

tlie  price  of  which  will  supply  the  family  with  axes, 
cutlasses,  hoes,  and  other  necessary  implements — with 
perhaps  a  gun,  and  a  few  other  articles  of  European 
manufacture  for  the  ensuing  year ; — if,  indeed,  the 
elder  ones  can  refrain  from  rum,  the  bane  and 
destroyer  of  their  race. 

From  the  manner  of  these  children  of  the  wilder- 
ness it  is  easy  to  perceive  that  they  are  more  or 
less  strangers  to  the  habits  of  civilized  life.  The 
young  ones  stare  around,  and  seem  bewildered  by 
the  various  objects  which  meet  their  gaze.  Their 
home  is  in  the  vast  forest,  and  on  the  banks  of  some 
one  of  the  rivers  which  intersect  the  interior  of  the 
country.  They  sometimes  visit  the  coast  and  the  city, 
but  only  for  the  purpose  of  procuring  the  articles 
before  mentioned,  after  which  they  return  to  their 
forest-home  until  necessitated  to  seek  a  fresh  supply. 

It  is  the  principal  object  of  the  following  pages, 
while  describing  some  of  the  efforts  which  have 
been  made  for  the  benefit  of  those  Indians,  to 
represent  their  condition,  past  and  present ;  and  to 
give  an  idea  of  their  habits  and  way  of  life. 

The  reader  must  not,  however,  from  the  prominence 
here  given  them,  suppose  that  the  aborigines  of  the 
country"  are  the  most  important  race ;  or  that  they 
have  been  the  chief  objects  of  attention  there.  They 
are  few  in  number  ;  a  feeble  remnant  thinly  scattered 
throuo-h  the  forests  and  savannahs  in  the  regions  of 
the  interior.  Other  races,  in  far  greater  numbers, 
occupy  and  cultivate  the  line  of  coast ;  and  for  their 
benefit  much  labour  has  been  expended  for  many  years. 


THE  COAST  AND  ITS  POPULATION.  7 

Though  the  religions  and  moral  state  of  the  people 
is  still  very  for  indeed  (especially  with  regard  to 
marriage)  fi'om  being  what  we  desire,  it  cannot  l)e 
compared  with  that  which  formerly  prevailed.  During 
the  last  century,  the  duties  of  religion  were  scarcely 
at  all  regarded  l)y  the  colonists.  Their  slaves  were 
brought  from  Africa  in  heathenism,  and  generally 
suffered  to  remain  so.  Public  worship  was  so  neg- 
lected, tliat  there  was  but  one  church  in  the  united 
colony  of  Demerara  and  Essequibo  at  the  termination 
of  the  Dutch  rule  in  1803.  The  beautiful  hymn  of 
the  American  Church, — 

"  Tlien,   through  our  solitary  coast 
Tlie  desert  features  soon  were  lost, 

Thy  temples   there   arose  ! 
Our  shores,  as  culture  made  them  fair, 
Were  hallow'd  by  Thy  rites,  by  prayer;  / 

And  blossom'd  as  the  rose," — 

could  not  then  have  been  sung  in  that  part  of  Guiana. 
By  degrees,  and  notwithstanding  much  opposition, 
a  favourable  change  took  place.  Even  in  the  rural 
districts,  places  of  worship  and  ministers  of  religion 
were  provided.  Efforts  were  made  for  the  conversion 
of  the  black  population  to  Christianity ;  and  at  the 
period  of  the  Emancipation,  considerable  care  was 
taken  that  they  should  generally  receive  instruction 
in  the  duties  of  religion.  Provision  was  made  for 
that  purpose  by  the  liberality  of  the  colonists,  with 
assistance  from  England.  Parishes  were  formed, 
churches,  chapels,  and  schools  buiU  along  the  line 
of  coast,    the    peasantry   aiding   willingly   according 


8  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

to  tlieir  means,  and  zealous  ministers  and  catecliists 
were  appointed  to  labour  among  tliem. 

Shortly  after  the  Emancipation,  the  very  great 
diminution  of  labour,  and  the  imperative  necessity 
of  keeping  up  the  cultivation,  led  to  the  introduction 
of  immigrants.  More  than  100,000  were  Ijrought 
from  various  countries  in  less  than  thirty  years  fol- 
lowing that  great  event. 

Of  that  number  more  than  one-fourth  were  blacks, 
from  the  AVest  Indian  Islands,  or  from  Africa. 

The  Portuguese  from  Madeira  were  rather  more 
than  a  fifth. 

A  few  hundreds  were  obtained  from  the  Cape  de 
Verde  Islands,  the  Azores,  Malta,  and  one  or  two 
other  places. 

But  more  than  half  the  entire  number  were  supplied 
by  the  teeming  populations  of  Southern  Asia  ;  the 
earliest  introduced  being  Coolies  from  Hindostan, 
who  came  under  indentm^e  for  five  years. 

Those  Hindoos,  retaining  the  costume  and  manners 
of  their  native  land,  soon  imparted  something  of  an 
Oriental  appearance  to  the  estates  on  which  they  were 
placed.  When  not  at  work,  their  usual  dress  is  a 
close  vest  of  thin  calico,  with  sleeves,  and  sometimes 
ornamented,  while  a  long  cloth  is  wrapped  round 
their  loins,  which  they  gird  up  tightly  when  setting 
forth  on  a  journey.  Their  women  generally  wear 
a  large  cloth  or  veil,  in  which  they  envelope  the 
head.  They  are  fond  of  ornament,  and,  as  soon  as 
they  can  procure  them,  wear  massive  silver  rings  on 
their  wrists  and  ankles.     The  feet  of  both  sexes  are 


TKE  COAST  AXn  iV'.s'  J'OPULATIOX.  [} 

bare,  or  shod  witli  rude  sandals;  wliicli,  with  the 
long  girdle,  earrings,  large  jewelled  onianients  in  the 
nose,  &c.,  forcibly  remind  the  beholder  of  the  repre- 
sentations of  Holy  Scripture. 

Those  natives  of  India  naturally  brought  with 
them  the  superstitions  and  ceremonies  in  which  they 
had  been  brought  up,  and  to  which  their  race  clings 
with  remarkable  tenacity. 

The  Mohammedan  portion  soon  attracted  attention 
by  the  annual  celebration  of  the  JMohurrim  :  a  solem- 
nity in  which  the  clay  effigies  of  Hassan  and  Hosein,^ 
the  grandsons  of  Mohammed,  were  borne  about 
in  tall  pagoda-like  shrines,  adorned  with  gay  colours, 
glass,  and  gilding.  After  several  nights  of  noisy 
procession,    with  beating  of  tom-toms  and  firing  of 

^  Hassan  and  Hosein  were  the  sons  of  Ali,  by  Fatinia,  tho 
daughter  of  Mohammed ;  Hassan  was  poisoned  by  his  enemies 
in  the  49th  year  of  the  Hegira  (about  a.d.  G70),  and  Hosein  was 
slain  while  journeying  with  his  family  near  the  banks  of  the 
Euphrates,  a  few  years  after.  Cut  off  from  the  water  by  a  body 
of  4,000  men,  he  heroically  defended  his  household,  until  he  sank 
exhausted  with  thirst,  and  covered  with  wounds.  Seventy-two 
devoted  followers  perished  with  him;  while  of  liis  foes  eighty- 
eight  were  killed,  and  a  great  number  wounded. 

The  many  virtues  and  sanctity  (according  to  the  standard  of  the 
Koran)  of  the  two  brethren,  their  high  birth  and  claim  to  tlie 
caliphate,  and  their  tragical  ends,  especially  that  of  Hosein,  made 
a  deep  impression  on  the  mind  of  the  Eastern  section  of  tho 
INIohammedan  \Vorld,  and  are  annually  commemorated  with  a 
strange  mixture  of  pathetic  lamentation,  warlike  show,  and  bar- 
baric magnificence  at  the  celebration  of  the  Mohurrim. 

The  rich  Mohammedans  of  India  are  lavish  in  their  expenditure 
on  these  occasions,  a  fact  whicli  those  who  witnessed  the  display 
made  by  tlieir  poorer  brethren  in  Guiana  would  readily  believe. 


10  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

guns,  the  solemnity  concludes  by  bringing  tbe  tajas, 
as  they  are  called,  in  great  pomp  to  an  appointed 
spot,  and  burying  the  images. 

Not  long  after  the  arrival  of  the  first  Hindoos, 
they  attempted  to  establish  the  custom,  too  common 
indeed  in  India,  but  which  seemed  strangely  horrible 
in  Guiana,  of  suspending  devotees,  by  hooks  fixed 
through  the  muscles  of  their  back  or  sides,  to  one  end 
of  a  long  beam,  which  was  turned  upon  a  pivot  fixed 
on  a  tall,  upright  post,  by  a  rope  attached  to  the  other 
end.  In  1848-9,  there  were  many  such  s]3ectacles. 
The  practice,  l)eing  horrid  and  brutalizing,  was  soon 
after  forcibly  stopped  by  the  Government  of  the 
colony,  and  it  is  now  mentioned  merely  to  record, 
with  thankfulness,  its  suppression. 

Attempts  of  the  Hindoos  to  estal)lish  the  public 
worship  of  their  idols  have  been  unsuccessful.  They 
were  in  Guiana  separated  from  their  time-honoured 
shrines  ;  and  the  surrounding  influences  in  a  great 
measure  weakened  their  faith  in  their  own  supersti- 
tions. But,  notwithstanding,  they  still  clung  to  their 
caste  ;  and  there  were  found  to  be  many  and  great  im- 
pediments to  the  spread  of  Christianity  among  them. 

Fresh  bodies  of  heathen  were  continually  being 
added  to  those  already  in  the  land.  The  latter,  who 
had  served  a  few  years,  were  looking  forward  to  the 
return  free  passage  to  India ;  with  their  savings,  often 
considerable,^  and   the  valuable    ornaments  of   silver 

1  In  1864,  the  ship  Ganges  took  tack  to  India  371  adult  Coolies, 
with  7G  children  ;  the  amount  of  savings  deposited  hy  them  for 
remittance  was  12,522/.  14,s.  5f/.     Their  jeM^ellery  was  worth  at  least 


THE  COAST  AND  TTS  POPULATION.  11 

and  gold,  \vliicli  regular  labour  had  eiial)k'd  them  to 
procure.  Among  those  temporary  sojourners,  the 
most  zealous  Christian  teachers,  ignorant  of  their 
lano-uao-e,  could  be  of  little  service  ;  and  a  numl)er 
of  years  elapsed  ere  missionaries,  specially  qualified 
to  labour  successfully  among  them,  could  be  procured 
and  brouo'ht  from  Hindostan. 

Some  of  the  Coolies,  however,  after  revisiting  their 
native  land,  returned  to  Guiana.  A  much  greater 
number,  after  fulfilling  their  engagements,  preferred 
to  remain  in  it,  apparently  making  it  their  home. 
These  now  understand  and  speak  English,  and,  with 
no  ancient  temples  of  idolatry  before  their  eyes  (as 
in  India),  come  within  reach  of  ordinary  ministra- 
tions. A  number  of  their  children  also  receive  in- 
struction  at  our  Christian  schools. 

The  Chinese  labourers,  more  recently  introduced, 
are  larger  and  stronger  in  person  than  the  Hindoos  : 
they  are  also  energetic  and  ingenious.  Gambling, 
opium-eating,  daring  theft,  and  disregard  of  life,  are 
vices  wliich  tarnish  the  better  qualities  of  their 
race. 

They  wore  the  loose  costume  of  their  native  land, 
well  known  from  the  pictures  on  tea-chests,  and  other 
familiar  representations.  Some,  however,  soon  dis- 
carded the  long  pig-tail  and  hat   of   enormous  size, 

1,000/.  more.     Beside  the  sums  remitted  tliroiigh  riovernmeiit,  one 
individual  took  with  him  a  bill  of  exchange  for  41G/.  13*'.  4</. 

In  the  following  year,  the  ship  Clarence  took  back  389  adults, 
with  80  children.  The  amount  transmitted  with  them,  exclusive 
of  jewellery,  was  11,230/.  4s.  2d. 


12  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

and  began  to  adopt  the  costume  and,  to  a  certain 
extent,  the  manners  of   Europeans. 

The  heathen  Chinese,  who  formed  the  majority  of 
those  immigrants,  either  had  few  religious  rites,  or 
were  not  demonstrative  in  performing  them.  But  a 
certain  number  were  Christians,  converted  in  their 
own  land,  most  of  whom  have  appeared  to  be  very 
sincere  in  their  profession  ;  and  with  them  came  some 
who  have  diligently  and  successfully  striven  to  con- 
vert their  heathen  brethren.  The  testimony  thus 
unexpectedly  afforded,  of  the  efficacy  of  Christian 
missions  in  the  far  distant  East,  was  most  encou- 
raging ;  causing  us,  amidst  our  embarrassment  at  the 
pouring  of  so  many  different  heathen  races  into 
Guiana,  to   "  thank  God,   and  take  courage." 

Many  of  these  Chinese  had  some  education,  and 
the  signs  of  their  written  language  are  common  to 
all.  But  the  dialects  spoken  by  them  vary  greatly, 
according  to  the  province  from  which  the  immigrant 
comes.  To  them  we  must  add  the  various  languages 
from  the  provinces  of  India  —  Hindustani,  Bengali, 
Tamil,  and  their  variations ;  and  again  to  these  the 
several  African  dialects  spoken  by  the  recaptured 
and  liberated  slaves  ;  to  those  also  the  Portuguese, 
Creole-Dutch,  and  others  of  European  origin ;  and, 
to  crown  all,  the  various  languages  of  the  aborigines. 
The  reader  may  then  imagine  something  of  the  posi- 
tion of  the  religious  teachers  in  many  districts,  during 
the  introduction  of  new  races  in  the  thirty  years 
following  the  emancipation  of  which  this  chapter 
treats,  amidst  such  a  Babel  of  tongues. 


TIJE  COAST  AND  ITS  POPULATION.  \\} 

The  superstitions  of  the  various  races  brought 
together  from  Africa,  Asia,  and  elsewhere  to  that 
province  will,  of  necessity,  long  exist  among  its  popu- 
lation. They  whose  duty  it  is  painfully  and  prayer- 
fully to  spread  the  light  of  Christian  kno^\■ledge  there 
must  labour  with  uiucli  patience,  remembering  how 
thick  the  darkness  which  for  thousands  of  years  over- 
shadowed the  people  ;  taking  encouragement  from 
each  favourable  sign  ;  and  firmly  believing  that  in  the 
end  "  Every  plant  which  the  Heavenly  Father  hath 
not  planted  shall  be  rooted   up." 


CHAPTER  II. 

THE    INTERIOR    AND    ITS    INHABITANTS. 

Sketch  of  tlie  Interior  of  Guiana — A  Day  in  its  Forests— Their 
k;xuriant  Vegetation — Birds,  Insects,  Reptiles,  &c.  &c. — 
Indians — Their  personal  Appearance,  Food,  Habitations,  and 
Way  of  Life. 

We  will  now  leave  the  cultivated  coast  of  Guiana, 
and  take  a  brief  glance  at  the  wide-spreading  interior. 
Though  in  so  large  a  country  there  is  considerable 
variety  of  surface,  forests  and  rivers  may  be  said  to 
form  its  most  striking  features.  The  woods  commence 
at  the  very  edge  of  the  sea,  and  even  in  the  sea  trees 
are  seen  standing  covered  with  leaves.  The  tall 
courida  and  mangrove  prevail  there,  and  at  the 
mouths  of  the  rivers.  A  dense  forest  spreads  thence 
over  many  thousands  of  square  miles, — broken  in 
certain  places  by  swamps,  and  in  others  by  extensive 
savannahs, — open  tracks  covered  with  grasses,  with 
clumps  of  trees  here  and  there.  The  sand-hills  and 
ridges  of  moderate  height  near  the  Atlantic  are 
covered  by  those  immense  forests ;  which  extend  to, 
and  climb  the  sides  of,  the  rocky  mountains  of  the 
distant  interior.  Magnificent  timber  trees — the  green 
heart   and   the   purple   heart,   the   stately  mora,  the 


THE  INTEliWlt  AND  ITS  JXUABJTANTS.  1.3 

simiri  or  locust  tree,  and  others  too  numerous  to 
mention — rear  their  heads  above  the  smaller  kinds, 
which  fill  the  spaces  between  them,  all  struggling  to 
find  room  for  their  foliage  ;  while  from  a  moist  carpet 
of  fallen  leaves,  moss,  and  fungi,  springs  liumljler 
veoetation  in  rank  luxuriance. 

Numerous  s})ecies  of  palms  give  beauty  and  variety 
to  the  wild  forest  scenery.  Among  them  are  the  turn, 
akuyuru,  and  awarra  ;  with  the  cocorite,  which  sup- 
plies the  wood  of  which  the  small  poisoned  arrows  are 
made.  There  is  also  the  trooly,  whose  leaves,  very 
long  and  broad,  are  used  in  thatching  houses ;  and  the 
eleo-ant  manicole,  which  abounds  on  the  Ijanks  of 
rivers,  rising  to  a  considerable  height,  with  its  slender 
stem  bending  gracefully  over  the  water.  The  cabbages 
at  the  top  of  this  and  several  other  species  are  excel- 
lent food. 

Creepers  and  bush -ropes,  as  they  are  called,  increase 
the  difficulty  of  penetrating  those  dense  forests.  They 
ascend  and  descend,  binding  and  interlacing  trunks 
and  branches  in  every  direction.  They  sometimes 
destroy,  by  their  abundance  and  ever-tightening 
embraces,  the  trees  which  support  them  ;  and  large 
branches,  and  even  trunks,  may  be  seen,  half  fallen, 
with  their  descent  arrested  by  them.  Beautiful  para- 
sites abound.     The  smface  of  the  crround  is  strewed 

o 

with  dead  leaves,  fallen  branches,  and  trees,  in  every 
stage  of  decay  ;  some  of  which  will  crumljle  into  dust 
beneath  the  foot  which  may  be  placed  upon  them. 

He  who  would  see  the  beasts  and  birds  of  these 
forests  should  rise  from  his  hammock  and  ramble  with 


16  THE  INDIAN  TBIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

the  Indian,  at  early  dawn,  through  the  bush  dripping 
with  dew.  The  jaguar,  having  completed  his  nightly 
prowl,  is  retiring  to  his  lair  ; — the  red  howling  monkey 
is  uttering  less  terrible  cries,  beginning  to  tire  of  his 
own  noise,  which  must  be  heard  to  be  duly  appre- 
ciated : — the  birds  and  smaller  animals  are  coming; 
forth  to  feed ;  and  everything  teems  with  life.  High 
overhead  green  parrots  of  various  species,  numerous 
and  noisy  as  rooks  or  jackdaws,  are  flying  to  their 
feeding-places.  Macaws — blue  and  yellow,  or  blue 
and  crimson — occasionally  show  themselves  ;  and  in 
the  higher  regions  is  seen  the  larger  species,  the 
magnificent  ara,  the  plumage  of  which  is  chiefly  of 
a  brilliant  scarlet,  set  ofl"  with  tints  of  purple  and 
gold.  The  toucan,  or  "  bill-bird,^'  is  displaying  his 
gorgeous  red  and  yellow  bosom,  and  tossing  liis 
enormous  beak  with  fantastic  jerks,  on  the  top  of 
the  highest  tree.  The  hannaqua  and  duraqua,  the 
marudi  and  the  maam ;  the  stately  crested  powis, 
large  as  a  turkey,  with  jet  l)lack  feathers  and  yellow 
beak  ;  and  many  others,  beautiful  in  shape  and  colour, 
or  good  for  food,  may  then  be  heard,  if  not  seen. 
Least  in  size,  but  not  in  beauty,  are  the  various 
species  of  humming-birds  ;  flitting  hither  and  thither 
like  bees,  and  flashing  like  jewels  of  many  colours 
in  the  rays  of   the  morning  sun. 

Insects,  creeping  or  flying,  meet  the  eye  in  every 
direction.  The  huge  black  nests  of  the  destructive 
wood -ants  are  fixed  on  decaying  trunks  or  branches. 
The  couslii  ants  are  stripping  a  favourite  tree  ;  some 
nipping  ofi"  the  leaves  above,  while  others  below  cut 


THE  INTERIOR  AND  ITS  INHABITANTS.  17 

them  into  small  pieces,  which  thousands  bear  away 
to  their  nests  deep  in  the  earth.  Very  singular  is 
the  appearance  of  those  portions  of  green  leaves, 
which,  as  you  stand  at  a  little  distance,  seem  to  be 
moving  along  the  track  of  their  own  accord,  ^^■ith 
undulating  motion  ;  as  their  bearers  in  close  succession 
surmount  the  inequalities  of  the  ground,  and  climl.-) 
over  the  little  obstacles  in  their  path.  Other  kinds 
of  ants  abound  ;  as  do  butterflies  and  winged  insects 
of  innumerable  species,  and  large  spiders,  which  on 
every  side  are  ku'king  to  ensnare  them. 

But  the  heat  of  the  day  increases,  and  the  birds 
seek  shelter  and  repose.  You  may  then  hear  in  the 
distance  the  wood-pigeon's  mournful  call  :  and  in 
certain  districts  the  solemn  toll  of  the  snow-white 
campanero,  or  bell-bu-d,  resounds  for  miles  over  forest 
and  river  :  but  few  birds  disport  themselves  during 
the  sultry  noon,  save  the  merry,  restless  pai-pai-yo ; 
which  flits  over  head  from  branch  to  branch,  and 
disturbs  the  general  stillness  by  its  strong  clear 
note,  from  the  sound  of  which  the  Indian  has  taken 
its  name. 

When  evening  approaches  the  busy  scene  of  the 
morning  is  repeated.  The  cassiques,  called  by  the 
colonists  mocking-birds,  black  and  yellow,  or  black  and 
scarlet,  become  particularly  loquacious,  as  they  fly  in 
and  out  of  their  pendent  nests.  The  flocks  of  parrots 
noisily  fly  homeward,  and  a  large  winged  insect,  heard 
also  at  morning  and  noon,  comes  forth  as  if  to  give 
notice  of  the  close  of  day  by  a  loud  harsh  noise,  from 
which  it  is  commonly  called  by  the  settlers  the  razor- 

c 


18  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

(jrinder.  After  this  all  gradually  subsides  into  the 
stillness  of  night ;  broken  by  the  croaking  of  frogs, 
the  occasional  cry  of  nocturnal  birds,  the  chirping  of 
insects,  and  the  slight  sound  of  the  vampire  and  other 
bats  in  their  eccentric  flight. 

But  let  the  wanderer  be  cautious  where  he  treads, 
and  sit  not  on  a  fallen  tree  until  he  has  examined  it, 
for  bush-centipedes,  huge  black  spiders,  and  scorj^ions 
may  be  in  dangerous  proximity  ;  and  ants,  the  bites 
of  which  are  very  painful,  will  begin  to  cover  the 
clothes  of  the  intruder  ere  he  is  aware  of  their  pre- 
sence. Certain  risks  and  annoyances  counterbalance 
the  pleasure  afforded  by  the  luxuriant  and  beautiful 
garb  which  Nature  here  assumes — mosquitoes  and 
sand-flies  are  very  numerous  and  annoying  in  many 
parts ; — and  the  marabunta  and  other  species  of 
wasp  infest  certain  localities.  But  the  serpents  which 
abound  are  chiefly  to  be  dreaded. 

The  konokosi,  or  bush-master,  is  the  largest  and 
most  dangerous  of  all  the  venomous  snakes  :  it  is  said 
to  attack  man  even  when  unmolested.  Next  to  this, 
the  rattlesnake  i&  most  feared  in  dry  situations,  and 
the  labaria  in  damp  places  ;  but  many  other  kinds  are 
equally  deadly.  The  names  of  some  of  the  species 
of  snakes  cannot  be  learned  even  from  the  Indians 
themselves. 

No  one  who  has  seen  the  agonies  which  the  bite  of 
a  venomous  serpent  inflicts  on  a  human  being  can 
look  upon  those  reptiles  again  without  a  feeling  almost 
amounting  to  horror.  It  has  unhappily  been  my  lot 
to  witness  on  more  than  one  occasion  the  effects  of  the 


THE  INTERIOR  AND  ITS  INHABITANTS.  \  9 

bite  of  the  labaria ;  l)ut  only  in  one  instance  liavc  I 
heard  of  a  full-grown  man  being  fairly  seized  by  one 
of  the  huge  constrictors  which  are  found  in  the 
country.  A  large  camudi,  or  water-python,  in  the 
swamps  of  Akawini,  sprang  on  an  Indian,  and  coiled 
sound  his  body,  confining  one  arm  ;  ere  it  could  master 
the  other,  the  man's  wife  handed  him  a  knife,  with 
which  he  inflicted  a  deep  cut,  causing  the  snake  to 
quit  him  and  retreat.  Some  Indians  also  once  found 
and  killed  a  large  camudi  in  a  state  of  torpidity, 
which  had  just  swallowed  a  boy  of  the  Caribi  nation. 
Deer,  and  even  the  smaller  kinds  of  alligator,  have 
l)een  sometimes  found  in  them. 

In  catching  these  reptiles  the  Indian  displays  great 
subtlety  and  dexterity.  I  have  seen  a  man  creep  on 
his  hands  and  knees,  and  capture  a  kolokonaro  by 
means  of  a  noose  which  he  dropped  over  its  head  with 
a  forked  stick,  as  it  was  raised  to  look  at  the  intruder. 
The  reptile,  its  head  being  kept  down  by  the  stick, 
was  then  hauled  out,  and  the  Indian,  grasping  it  by 
the  neck,  allowed  it  to  coil  round  his  arm.  The  kolo- 
konaro (a  young  one)  was  only  about  five  feet  in 
length,  but  so  thick  and  strong  that  the  man  soon  had 
to  caU  for  assistance  to  release  his  arm  from  its  pres- 
sure. This  species  is  marked  all  over  (but  more 
vividly  near  the  tail)  with  brown,  orange,  white,  and 
other  colours.  It  is  sometimes  called  the  land- 
oamudi,  to  distinguish  it  from  the  other  and  larger 
kind,  which  takes  to  the  water. 

Some  of  the  latter  attain,  in  desolate  regions,  to  a 
length  of  more  than  thirty  feet.     The  longest  I  have 

c  2 


20  .     THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

known  was  little  more  than  twenty.  The  Indians 
found  it  gorged  with  food,  tied  it  by  the  neck  to  the 
stern  of  a  canoe,  and  towed  it  to  the  residence  of  a 
settler,  to  whom  they  disposed  of  it  alive. 

Of  the  quadrupeds  found  in  these  forests  the  largest 
is  the  tapir  or  maipuri,  commonly  called  the  bush- 
cow  ;  it  is  of  the  size  of  a  large  calf,  and  its  flesh 
resembles  beef  It  is  a  thick  and  clumsy-looking 
animal,  with  a  tapering  and  flexible  upper  lip,  feeding 
on  vegetable  productions,  harmless,  and  taking  to  the 
water  when  assailed.  Several  kinds  of  deer  are  also 
hunted  by  the  Indians,  one  of  which,  the  wiribisiri,  is 
remarkable  for  its  elegance  of  form  and  very  diminu- 
tive size.  Herds  of  bush-hogs,  as  they  are  called,  may 
sometimes  be  met  with,  the  larger  species  of  which 
will  turn  savagely  on  an  assailant.  They  have  an 
offensive  orifice  on  the  back,  which  the  hunters  cut 
out  as  soon  as  the  animal  is  taken  ;  the  other  flesh 
then  is  good.  The  acouri  or  agouti  somewhat  resem- 
bles the  guinea-pig,  but  it  is  larger,  has  legs  much 
longer  in  proportion,  and  is  much  more  nimble.  Its 
colour  is  a  reddish  brown. 

There  is  no  animal  whose  flesh  is  more  highly 
valued  than  the  labba.  It  is  of  the  size  and  shape 
of  a  small  pig,  though  its  nose,  feet,  and  some  other 
parts  of  its  body  more  resemble  those  of  a  hare. 
Being  delicious  food  it  is  hunted  without  mercy  ;  but 
always  keeps  near  the  water,  and  plunges  in  when 
pursued.  The  Indians  hunt  it  in  two  parties,  one 
chasing  it  with  dogs  to  the  stream,  while  the  other,  in 
a  small  canoe,  follows  the  sound  of  the  chase.     The 


THE  INTERIOR  AND  ITS  INHABITANTS.  21 

liuutcr  in  the  bow  of  tlie  canoe  observes  the  pkinoc, 
watches  the  bubbles  that  rise  to  the  top  of  the  water, 
and  with  ready-pointed  arrow  shoots  the  terrified 
creature  as  it  approaches  the  surface  to  breathe. 

The  sloth  is  occasionally  seen,  moving  along  with 
its  back  downwards,  being  suspended  by  its  powerful 
claws  to  the  branches  of  trees. — Opossums  of  different 
species  are  also  met  with. — But  there  are  no  animals 
which  give  more  life  to  forest  scenes  than  the  monkeys, 
of  which  there  are  many  kinds.  The  rod  howlers  are 
perhaps  the  most  disagreeable ;  the  greyish-bro\vii 
monkeys,  the  most  common  ;  and  the  sakuwinkis, 
the  most  pretty  and  amusing.  Those  playful  little 
creatures  will  keep  company  with  a  canoe  for  some 
distance,  whistling  and  chattering  to  the  paddlers ; 
while  the  woods  resound  with  the  crashing  of  branches 
as  they  spring,  one  after  another,  from  tree  to  tree  in 
their  merry  course.  Another  kind  of  monkey,  called 
c[uata  (or  coaita),  with  long  shaggy  black  haii',  and 
melancholy  aspect,  may  be  seen  occasionally  taking 
a  grave  and  apparently  critical  survey  of  an  ap- 
proaching party ;  till  the  necessity  of  taking  care  of 
his  personal  safety  seems  to  flash  across  his  mind, 
and  he  makes  a  wild  and  undignified  retreat.  Some 
of  the  other  species  are  rarely  met  with. 

There  are  two  or  three  kinds  of  ant-eaters,  one  of 
considerable  size.  With  tapering  muzzle,  crested  mane, 
and  enormous  sweeping  tail,  it  moves  on  c|uictly  in 
quest  of  its  prey;  but,  when  provoked,  will  rush 
furiously  on  its  assailant.  Woe  to  the  enemy  whom 
it  can  overturn  and  hold  in  the  unrelaxing  grip   of 


22  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

its  huge  claws  !  The  armadillo,  coatimondi,  and  other 
more  or  less  remarkable  animals,  are  also  met  with 
on  terra  Jirma ;  while  the  capybara,  or  water-haas, 
frequents  the  muddy  margin  of  lakes  and  rivers. 

The  excitement  of  the  life  in  the  woods  is  kept 
up  by  the  possibility  of  meeting  with  animals  of  the 
feline  species ;  the  ocelot,  the  puma,  the  beautifully 
spotted  jaguar,  and  the  black  variety,  the  rarest  and 
most  dreaded  of  all. 

In  the  deepest  glades  of  the  forest,  or  near  the 
streams  which  wind  in  every  direc^tion  through  the 
woods,  these  animals  may  be  seen,  though  but  seldom 
where  Indian  hunters  are  numerous,  and  armed  with 
guns.  Although  the  spotted  jaguar  is  a  beast  of 
prey,  it  is  impossible  to  gaze  without  admiration  on 
his  rich  glossy  skin,  as  the  sunbeams  fall  on  it  through 
the  opening  in  the  tall  trees  caused  by  the  stream. 
He  will  not,  however,  allow  you  much  time  for 
observing  the  black  spots,  disposed  in  rings  or  rosettes 
on  his  tawny  hide ;  as  he  generally  retreats  after 
gazing  for  a  few  seconds  at  the  intruding  party  ; 
often  looking  round,  as  he  glides  off  with  noiseless 
step,  and  bounds  carelessly,  and  without  the  least 
apparent  effort,  over  the  fallen  trees  which  may  lie 
in  his  path.  He  is  very  seldom  seen  in  the  day-time. 
At  night  he  approaches  the  dwellings  of  men,  where 
his  yell  is  often  heard,  and  his  track  is  visible  in 
the  morning. 

Although  the  jaguar  rarely  attacks  man,  it  is  well 
known  that  he  will  do  so  if  very  hungry  or  favoured 
by  darkness.     A  winding  in  the  river  Arapaiaco  i^. 


THE  INTERIOR  AND  ITS  INHABITANTS.  23 

called  Tiger-hand  (or  bend),  from  the  circumstance  of 
a  solitary  and  benighted  Indian  having  been  killed 
and  eaten  there  by  one  of  those  animals.  Whether 
he  was  intoxicated,  and  forgot  to  kindle  a  fire,  or 
slept  too  soundly,  and  let  the  guardian  fire  go  out, 
was  not  known ;  but  his  remains,  half  devoured,  were 
found  there  next  morning.  There  are  also  well- 
known  instances  in  which  the  jaguar  has  attacked 
man  even  by  day.^ 

The  rivers  of  the  country  are  very  numerous.  The 
largest  is  the  Essequibo  ;  which,  including  windings, 
is  more  than  six  hundred  miles  in  length,  and  receives 
the  waters  of  several  large  tributaries.  To  the  east- 
ward of  this  are  the  Demerara,  Berbice,  and  Corentyn, 
with  several  others.  The  main  rivers  form  magni- 
ficent cataracts  and  rapids  as  they  descend  from  the 
higher  lands  of  the  interior.  Some  are  beautified 
with  numerous  islands,  and  are  very  broad  at  the 
mouth  ;  the  estuary  of  the  Corentyn  being  ten  miles 
across,  and  that  of  the  Essequibo  nearly  twenty. 

To  the  westward  of  the  Essequibo  are  the  Pomeroon, 

Monica,  Waini,  Barima,  and  others  of  various  sizes, 

1  One  of  those  animals  came  to  a  settlement  on  the  Haimara 
— Cabura,  in  October  1804,  at  mid-day.  It  was,  said  the  Arawiik 
whose  family  it  came  to  attack,  "excessively  kaiima,  or  savage 
(probably  having  cubs),  and  shouts  did  not  terrify  but  enraged  it." 
He  had  just  time  to  drop  a  slug  into  his  gun,  which  had  been 
loaded  with  small  shot,  and  to  fire  as  he  met  the  beast,  "svithout 
bringing  it  to  his  shoulder.  The  skin  (in  my  possession)  shows 
that  the  small  shot  flew  over  the  head,  and  sprinkled  the  back, 
striking  off  the  hair  ;  while  the  slug,  taking  a  lower  course,  entered 
just  beneath  the  eye,  killing  the  animal,  and  saving  the  man  on 
■whom  it  was  about  to  spring. 


24  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

which  drain  the  large  tract  of  country  lying  between 
the  cultivated  coast  and  the  delta  of  the  Orinoco. 
This  district  may  be  described  as  an  immense  swampy 
forest,  intersected  by  a  few  ridges  of  sand,  and 
abounding  in  lakes,  and  what  are  called  wet  savan- 
nahs ;  which  become  sheets  of  dry-crusted  mud  in  the 
hot  season.  Some  of  them  are  studded  with  islands 
covered  with  trees ;  and  clusters  of  ita-palms  are 
seen  growing  in  the  swamp  itself,  on  spots  of  land 
a  little  higher  than  the  rest.  Those  palms,  with 
their  fan-like  leaves,  and  trunks  that  resemble  stone 
columns,  give  beauty  to  a  scene  otherwise  dreary 
and  desolate. 

Many  fine  fish  are  found  in  the  rivers  and  lakes. 
In  some  of  the  streams  of  the  interior  are  found 
arapaima  (or  pirarucu)  of  more  than  200  lbs.  weight, 
which  the  Indians  kill  with  arrows.  Of  the  smaller 
kinds  many  are  delicious,  as  the  haimara,  pacu,  &c. 
Others  are  rather  dangerous  to  bathers,  the  pirai 
especially,  which  I  have  known  (in  two  instances) 
to  have  nearly  severed  the  great  toe  of  an  Indian 
standirig  in  the  water. 

The  formidable  cayman  inhabits  the  larger  rivers, 
and  a  smaller  kind  of  alligator  is  found  in  the  waters 
near  the  coast.  Otters  are  so  pugnacious  that  they 
will  sometimes  follow  your  canoe,  and  bite  at  the 
steering  paddle. 

Those  rivers  are  the  only  means  of  communication 
with  the  interior.  The  dense  forests  have  no  roads, 
save  the  foot-track  of  the  Indian.  To  visit  the  abo- 
riginal tribes,  we  must  ascend  those  streams. 


THE  INTERIOR  AND  ITS  INHABITANTS.  25 

The  Indian  in  his  native  forests  is  by  no  means  the 
half-stupified  being  he  may  have  appeared  to  you  when 
wandering  (intoxicated  perhaps)  through  the  city, 
or  on  the  phxntations.  Surrounded  then  by  strange 
people,  and  objects  to  which  he  was  unaccustomed, 
lie  was  out  of  his  place,  and  conscious  of  it ;  but  when 
he  returns  to  the  woods,  he  is  at  home,  and  feels 
himself  infinitely  superior  in  the  requirements  of  forest 
life  to  the  civilized  stranger  who  may  visit  him.  The 
latter,  endeavouring  to  make  his  way  through  the 
tangled  bush,  or  staggering  across  a  swampy  place  on 
slender  pieces  of  wood,  must  appear  to  the  Indian  at 
least  as  awkward  as  the  Indian,  surrounded  by  the 
objects  of  ci^dlized  life,  appeared  to  him. 

The  Guiana  Indian  seldom  exceeds  five  feet  five 
inches  in  height,  and  the  greater  number  are  much 
shorter.  They  are  rather  stout  in  proportion,  and  it 
is  rare  to  see  an  instance  of  deformity  among  them. 

Their  skin  is  of  a  copj^er  tint,  a  little  darker  than 
that  of  the  natives  of  Southern  Europe.  Their  hau'  is 
straight  and  coarse,  and  continues  jet  black  till  an 
advanced  period  of  life.  Their  eyes  are  also  black  and 
keen,  and  their  sight  and  hearing  very  acute. 

The  only  dress  wliich  the  Indian  (in  his  heathen 
state)  thinks  necessary  for  everyday  life,  is  a  strip  of 
cotton,  bound  tightly  round  the  loins,  or  secured  by 
a  cord  tied  round  the  waist.  In  this  they  generally 
carry  a  knife  (similar  to  om'  carving-knives),  which 
they  use  in  clearing  their  way  through  tangled  briers 
or  lianas,  and  as  a  weapon  in  any  emergency.  A 
single  strmg  of  beads  is  worn  round  the  neck,  and 


26  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

sometimes  a  collar  made  of  the  teeth  of  the  bush-hog^ 
or  peccary,  or  of  other  wild  animals.  Many  individuals 
wear  a  small  cord  round  the  wrists  and  ankles.  They 
also  make  beautiful  coronals  or  tiaras  of  the  feathers 
of  parrots,  macaws,  and  other  birds,  set  off  with  the 
brilliant  scarlet  breast  of  the  toucan,  and  surmounted 
by  the  tail-feathers,  scarlet  or  purple,  of  the  macaw  ; 
but  these,  with  many  other  gay  and  fantastic  orna- 
ments, are  seldom  worn,  except  on  festive  occasions, 
or  the  days  of  their  great  dances. 

The  women  of  most  tribes  in  their  heathen  condi- 
tion are  as  scantily  attired  as  the  men,  but  wear  more 
ornaments.  They  have  many  necklaces  of  beads  of 
different  lengths,  to  which  silver  coins,  &c.,  the  teeth 
of  the  jaguar  and  other  beasts,  and  sometimes  shells, 
are  attached.  Those  necklaces,  with  a  very  small  ajDron 
of  beads,  worked  in  some  handsome  pattern,  and 
called  queyu,  form  the  full  dress  of  an  Indian  belle. 

The  females  of  the  Araw4k  tribe  had,  however,  been 
a  little  civilized  by  intercourse  with  the  wives  of 
settlers,  and  often  possessed  a  kind  of  petticoat,  which 
they  called  kimisa,  from  the  Spanish  camisa,  and 
suspended  with  a  string  over  one  shoulder,  leaving 
the  other  bare.  Their  husbands  also  generally  had 
at  least  a  shirt,  with  a  cap  or  hat.  These  were  put 
on  when  they  expected  to  meet  civilized  persons,  and 
then  carefully  laid  by  until  a  similar  occasion  called 
for  their  use. 

In  selecting  the  site  for  his  habitation,  the  Indian 
is  guided  by  three  or  four  requirements.  It  must  bo 
near  the  water,  that  his  wife  and  daughter  may  fetch  it 


THE  INTERIOR  AND  ITS  INHABITANTS.  27 

with  little  trouble  for  the  use  of  the  family,  and  that 
his  canoe  may  be  in  readiness  for  loading,  when  setting 
out  on  one  of  their  frequent  migrations.  It  must 
be  in  the  neighbourhood  of  a  light  sandy  soil,  fit  for 
the  groT\i:h  of  cassava  and  other  vegetables.  Lastly, 
it  must  be  in  a  place  little  frequented,  for  he  is  shy 
and  retiring,  and  will  leave  his  quarters  if  too  niueli 
disturbed. 

When  he  has  found  a  spot  possessing  these  advan- 
tages, he  builds  a  house,  and  cuts  down  a  large  space 
of  forest  to   form   his  field.     This   is   generally  done 
in  Aujxust,  at  the  commencement  of  the  liot  season. 
The   foliage   and   branches   being  soon   dried  l)y  the 
sun,  he  sets  them  on  fire,  and  the  fierce  conflagration 
consumes  all  but  the  charred  and  blackened  trunks 
and  limbs  of  the  large  trees.     These  he  leaves  on  the 
ground.     He  has  done  his  part  in  clearing  the  field ; 
the  planting,  weeding,  and  other  parts  of  cultivation 
belong  to   the    females    of   the   family.     \\^iile  they 
attend  to  this  and  their  household  work,  he  occupies 
himself  in  hunting  and  fishing,  spending  much  time 
in  making  baskets,  &c.,  and  lying  indolently  in  his 
hammock  until  necessitated  to  fish,  or  use  the  more 
\T:olent  exercise  of  the  chase,  to  provide  for  the  wants 
of  his  family. 

If  a  \Hsitor  to  the  dwelling  of  the  Indian  expects 
much  in  the  way  of  architecture,  he  will  be  disap- 
pointed ;  a  roof  of  trooly  or  some  other  thatch,  sup- 
ported on  a  few  posts  and  beams,  being  generally  all. 
There  is  some  variety  in  the  shape  of  these  habitations  ; 
sometimes  one  or  two  sides  are  enclosed,  and  some- 


28  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

times  the  roof  itself  slopes  to  the  ground.  Some  of 
the  inland  tribes  have  steeple  or  bell-shaped  huts, 
supported  by  a  tall  central  post.  The  women  usually 
cook  in  a  smaller  out-building  or  kitchen,  and,  with 
their  children,  eat  and  live  there. 

In  the  man's  apartment,  we  find  a  few  low  seats, 
sometimes  carved  out  of  blocks  of  wood  into  the  rude 
form  of  quadrupeds.  From  the  beams  are  suspended 
the  hammocks  of  the  persons  residing  there,  which 
form  their  luxurious  places  of  repose,  waking  or 
sleeping.  Those  hammocks  are  made  of  network  of 
cotton,  or  of  the  fibres  of  the  ita  palm-leaf,  called 
tibisire.  They  are  not  only  convenient,  but  absolutely 
necessary,  that  the  person  sleeping  may  be  out  of  the 
way  of  most  of  the  venomous  creatures  which  infest 
the  forests.  Fires  are  lighted  under  the  hammocks, 
which  keep  ofi"  wild  animals,  and  counteract  the  ex- 
cessive dampness  of  the  night  air. 

The  apartment  is  also  furnished  with  the  implements 
used  in  hunting  and  fishing.  Strong  bows,  five  or  six 
feet  long,  made  of  polished  wood,  and  arrows  of  neat 
manufacture,  are  there,  with  fish-hooks  and  rods  of 
various  sizes.  In  the  settlements  near  the  coast,  there 
is  generally  a  gun,  if  the  man  be  industrious,  and 
among  the  more  distant  tri])es  its  place  is  supplied 
by  the  long  blow-pipe  and  the  poisoned  arrows  which 
are  discharged  through  it.  We  see  also  the  Indian 
baskets,  called  pegalls  {Carihi  pegalla),  which  are 
made  of  the  outer  skin  of  a  large  reed  or  cane,  called 
iturite.  This  is  split  into  long  strips,  half  of  which 
are  coloured  black  or  red,  which  are  then  interwoven 


TEE  INTERIOR  AND  ITS  IXUABITANTS.  2i) 

in  various  oruamental  patterns,  resembling  those  foiiiRl 
on  tlie  carved  ruins  of  Mexico  and  Central  America, 
or  on  the  tombs  and  pottery  of  ancient  Egypt  or 
Etrmia.^  The  pegall  has  a  cover  that  entirely  en- 
closes the  under  part,  and  in  it  the  Indian  keeps  his 
scanty  wardrobe — a  comb,  a  looking-glass,  and  other 
articles  for  his  toilet,  and  sometimes  an  article  intended 
for  a  very  different  purpose,  being  a  small  club  ^Yith 
sharp  corners,  made  of  ver^^  hard  and  heavy  wood, 
and  capable  of  killing  an  enemy  by  a  single  blow.  A 
supply  of  tobacco  will  probably  be  not  far  off;  it  is 
an  article  of  which  the  Indians  are  veiy  fond,  and 
it  has  almost  a  sacred  character  with  them  from  its 
use  in  their  superstitious  rites.  They  make  cigars 
by  rolling  the  leaf  up  in  the  inner  bark  of  a  tree. 

The  woman's  apartment,  or  kitchen,  as  we  may  call 
it,  is  seen  to  be  furnished  with  a  number  of  vessels  for 
culinary  purposes.  Those  of  Indian  manufacture  are 
formed  by  themselves  of  a  certain  kind  of  clay,  and 
baked  and  blackened  over.  The  ffoo^lets,  or  close- 
necked  vessels  for  holding  water,  are  also  made  by 
themselves ;  but  for  the  rough  work  of  fetching  it 
from  the  river  they  generally  manage  to  procure  one 
of  our  large  and  strong  stone  bottles,  which  the  women 
carry,  as  they  do  their  other  burdens,  on  the  back, 

^  Similar  ornamental  patterns  are  used  by  the  Indians  on  the 
Orinoco  and  elsewhere.  Humboldt,  describing  those  which  he 
found  on  the  funeral  urns  in  the  cavern  of  Ataruipe,  says,  "They 
are  foxmd  in  every  clime,  and  in  every  stage  of  human  culture — 
among  the  Greeks  and  IJomans,  the  South  Sea  islanders,  and  in 
all  regions  where  a  rhythmical  repetition  of  regular  forms  delights 
the  eye." — Vietvs  of  Nature,  p.  172. 


30  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

supporting  its  weight  by  a  strap  or  band  placed  across 
the  forehead. 

We  see  also  a  large  grater,^  on  which  they  scrape  the 
cassava  root  into  a  pulpy  mass,  which  is  received  in  a 
shallow  trough, — generally  part  of  an  old  canoe.  There 
is  also  a  strainer,  made  of  plaited  material,  like  that  of 
the  pegall  before  described,  but  much  coarser.  It  is 
a  long  tube,  open  at  the  top  and  closed  at  the  bottom, 
which  ends  in  a  strong  loop.  The  white  pulpy  mass 
of  cassava  is  put  into  this  tube,  which  is  suspended 
from  a  beam.  One  end  of  a  staff  is  then  placed 
through  the  loop  at  the  bottom ;  the  woman  sits  on 
the  staff  (or  attaches  a  heavy  stone  to  the  end)  and  the 
weight  stretches  the  elastic  tube,  which  contracting  on 
the  pnlpy  mass  within,  forces  its  white  juice  by  com- 
pression through  the  plaited  material  of  which  it  is 
made.  This  liquor  is  carefully  collected  in  a  vessel 
placed  beneath.  It  is  a  most  deadly  poison,  and  any 
animal  that  drinks  it  while  it  remains  in  that  state 
swells  and  dies  in  great  agony.  But  by  being  boiled 
it  changes  to  a  deep  brown  colour,  and  becomes  the 
wholesome  and  nutritious  sauce  called  casareep,  which 
is  a  chief  ingredient  in  the  pepper-pot,  a  favourite 
dish  of  the  country. 

^  The  grater  made  by  the  native  tribes  in  the  distant  interior, 
consists  of  a  board  21  or  3  feet  long  and  18  inches  broad.  It  is 
made  of  the  soft  outer  layers  of  the  purple-heart  tree.  The  Indian, 
having  shaped  this,  and  marked  it  with  cross-lines,  beats  in  small 
angular  fragments  of  hard  green  stone,  which  project  slightly  from 
the  surface.  The  milk  of  a  certain  tree,  coloured  with  roucou  (or 
arnotto),  being  spread  over  the  board,  glues  in  the  rocky  fragments, 
and  gives  a  varnish  to  the  whole. 


THE  INTERIOR  AND  ITS  INHABITANTS.  31 

111  tlic  womaii's  apartment  we  also  see  a  circular 
iron  plate,  on  wliicli  the  cassava  is  spread  and  baked  in 
broad  thin  cakes.  These  form  the  bread  of  the  Indian. 
Yams,  sweet  potatoes,  and  other  esculents  are  also 
-cultivated  by  them. 

Some  of  the  Indian  "  places  "  have  a  rude  apparatus 
for  extracting  the  juice  of  the  sugar-cane — a  sort  of 
mill  with  small  rollers  being  used  by  the  more  ad- 
vanced. Another  kind  which  I  saw  used  by  the 
•Caribs  was  very  primitive.  It  consisted  of  a  thick 
post,  the  upper  part  of  which  was  car^^d  into  a  rude 
resemblance  of  a  human  bust.  The  cane  was  placed 
on  the  part  answering  to  the  collar-bone,  and  crushed 
there  by  a  long  lever  or  staff  inserted  in  a  hole  through 
the  neck,  and  worked  by  hand,  the  sweet  juice  flomng 
down  the  breast  into  a  vessel  placed  to  receive  it. 

The  task  of  cultivation,  after  the  field  is  cleared 
iind  l:)urnt  off,  falls  chiefly  on  the  females.  They  are 
expected  also  to  provide  firewood,  bear  burdens  on 
the  march,  and  perform  the  general  cbudgery  of  the 
settlement. 

]\Iany  of  the  implements  used  by  the  Indians  ai'e, 
as  we  have  seen,  now  made  of  iron.  Before  Europeans 
introduced  that  metal,  stones  with  sharpened  edges 
were  used,  specimens  of  which  are  sometimes,  though 
rarely,  found  in  digging.  Very  diflicult  and  laborious 
it  must  have  been  to  fell  a  tree,  or  "  dig  out "  a  canoe, 
with  such  poor  tools.  The  Indians  now  obtain  from 
us  guns,  axes,  hoes,  cutlasses,  knives,  and  many  other 
articles  of  metal.  They  make  the  barbed  heads  of 
their  arrows  out  of  old  cutlasses,  and  shape  them  very 


52  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF^GTJIANA. 

neatly.  Monkey-bones  are  used  for  that  purpose  by 
the  more  distant  and  barbarous  tribes.  Many  of  the 
arrows  used  by  all  are  still  pointed  with  tough  wood, 
hardened  in  the  fire  ;  and  they  boast  that  such  as  these 
have  been  known  to  pierce  through  the  body  of  a  man^ 
when  discharged  by  a  powerful  arm. 

They  travel  much,  the  coast  tribes  chiefly  by  water. 
The  canoe  then  bears  the  burden,  which  they  must 
otherwise  carry  themselves.  The  light  vessels  or  wood- 
skins  used  in  the  interior  are  generally  made  of  a 
single  piece  of  bark,  and  will  be  hereafter  described. 
Those  used  near  the  coast  are  each  made  of  the  trunk 
of  a  tree,  hollowed  out  and  opened  by  manual  labour 
and  the  action  of  fire.  They  are  generally  pointed  both 
at  stem  and  stern  ;  and  in  that  shape  are  called  corials 
by  the  settlers,  from  a  Caribi  word  signifying  a  canoe.^ 
The  latter  word  is  mostly  used  to  denote  the  larger 
craft,  which  have  the  pointed  head  and  stern  cut  ofi";, 
and  the  openings  thus  caused  filled  by  pieces  of  j)lank, 
on  which  various  fantastic  devices  are  painted  accord- 
ing to  the  owner's  taste.  Sometimes  a  plank,  cut  and 
smoothed  out  of  a  soft  kind  of  wood,  is  laced  tightly 
on  the  side  to  make  it  higher,  and  the  seam  is  caulked. 
He  who  possesses  one  of  these  large  canoes  is  a  great 
man  among  them. 

They  use  paddles,  those  made  of  the  fluted  pro- 
jections of  the  lower  part  of  the  trunk  of  the  yaruru 
tree  being  considered  the  best.  The  stroke  is  regular, 
but  they  often  vary  the  measure,  the  signal  for  which 

^  The  latter  word  will  te  used  in  this  work,  as  more  extensively 
understood. 


THE  INTERIOR  AND  ITS  INHABITANTS.  33 

is  usually  given  by  the  water  being  thrown  high  in  the 
air  from  the  blade  of  a  paddle.  This  is  done  by  the 
bowman,  who  gives  the  stroke  to  the  others. — All 
the  paddlers  sit  facing  the  head  of  the  canoe. 

The  following  is  the  description  given  by  a 
former  writer  of  an  Indian  family  in  a  canoe  on  the 
Berbice  : — 

"  Before  the  canoe  reached  the  fort,  we  observed  the 
long  black  hair  and  naked  skins  of  the  man,  his  two 
wives,  and  several  children,  who  were  all  seated  about 
the  vessel,  trimming  it  most  neatly.  The  canoe  was 
lai'ge,  and  loaded  with  cedar,  or  other  kinds  of  wood 
for  sale  or  barter.  On  the  top  appeared  a  ferocious- 
looking  animal,  setting  up  his  bristles  like  the  quills  of 
a  porcupine."  (This  was  doubtless  a  young  bush-hog, 
a  pet  of  the  family.)  "  A  small  monkey  also  was 
skipping  about  the  canoe.  On  one  side  sat  two  very 
fine  parrots,  and  on  the  other  was  a  very  large  and 
beautiful  macaw,  exhibiting  all  the  splendours  of  his 
gay  plumage.  On  the  canoe  arriving  at  the  landing- 
place,  the  bow  and  arrows,  clay  cooking-vessels,  cala- 
bashes, hammocks,  and  crab-baskets  were  all  brought 
into  view,  forming  a  very  complete  and  striking  speci- 
men of  original  ecjuipage  and  accommodation.  The 
whole  family,  with  the  apparatus,  furniture,  and  im- 
plements for  cooking,  sleeping,  shooting,  fishing, 
and  travelling,  were  here  moved  in  one  complete 
body."  1 

This    description    of    what     is     usually    called    a 

'  Dr.  Piiickard,   1806. 
D 


34  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

"  Buck  "  -^  family  on  tlie  water  might  serve  for  many 
at  the  present  day. 

Though  for  nearly  three  centuries  some  of  the 
native  tribes  had  been  in  gradually  increasing  contact 
with  Europeans  of  diiferent  nations, — first  as  bitter 
foes,  exterminating  where  they  could,  and  afterwards 
as  friends  and  allies, — still,  whether  foes  or  friends 
to  civilized  man,  their  habits  remained  but  little 
altered.  They  used  our  better  tools  and  weapons, 
indeed,  but  retained  their  own  way  of  life,  with  little 
modification.  Their  tastes  and  propensities  remained 
unchanged.  Instances  have  been  known  where  young 
individuals  of  both  sexes  have  been  taken  away  from 
the  country  and  carefully  educated,  so  that  it  seemed 
impossible  they  could  ever  again  sink  into  their 
natural  condition.  Opportunity  ofiered ;  the  dark 
green  forest  was  before  their  eyes,  the  Indian  was 
the  Indian  still,  and  the  unconquerable  longing  for 
the  wild  life  in  the  woods  has  ever  been  too  strong 
in  them  for  the  restraints  of  our  civilization. 

The  experience  of  later  years  has,  however,  shown 
us  that  the  Indians — if  allowed  to  range  their  native 
woods,  fish,  hunt,  and  plant  cassava,  as  their  fathers 
before  them — may,  in  the  intervals  of  their  own  work, 
by  cutting  and  squaring  timber,  clearing  bush  on 
plantations,  thatching  cottages  or  logics,  &c.,  render 
valuable  service  to  the  community  on  whose  borders 
they  dwell. 

^  The  Indian  men  and  women  were  called  by  the  Dutch 
"Bucks"  and  "  Buckeens,"  and  those  rather  inelegant  expressions 
are  still  in  common  use. 


THE  INTERIOR  AND  ITS  INHABITANTS.  35 

Those  more  industrious  and  civilized  liabits  are, 
llo^Yever,  of  recent  development.  They  have  been 
in  great  measure  the  result  of  missions  planted  anion <t 
their  wild  forests  and  rivers  ;  and  of  the  influence, 
gradually  spreading  from  them,  of  that  which  in  the 
seventh  and  eighth  centuries  gave  the  impulse  which 
resulted  in  the  civilization  of  the  fiercer  and  hardier 
inhabitants  of  the  forests  of  Northern  Europe, — the 
religion  of  our  Lord. 


D  2 


CHAPTER  III. 

EARLY   EXPLORERS    OF    GUIANA,    AND    FIRST    MISSIONS 
TO    THE    INDIAN    TRIBES. 

Indian  ideas  of  God,  &c. — Object  of  First  Explorers — El  Dorado — 
First  Colonists — Their  Contests  with  the  Natives — Missions 
to  the  Indians  in  French  Guiana,  and  of  the  Moravians  in 
Berbice  and  Surinam — Their  Fate. 

The  aborigines  of  Guiana,  in  tlieir  naturally  wild  and 
untaught  condition,  have  had  a  confused  idea  of  the 
existence  of  one  good  and  supreme  Being,  and  of 
many  inferior  spirits,  who  are  supposed  to  be  of 
various  kinds,  but  generally  of  malignant  character. 

The  Good  Spirit  they  regard  as  the  Creator  of  all, 
and,  as  far  as  we  could  learn,  they  believe  Him  to  be 
immortal  and  invisible,  omnipotent  and  omniscient. 
But  notwithstanding  this,  we  have  never  discovered 
any  trace  of  religious  worship  or  adoration  paid  to 
Him  by  any  tribe  while  in  its  natural  condition. 
They  consider  Him  as  a  Being  too  high  to  notice 
them  ;  and,  not  knowing  Him  as  a  God  that  heareth 
prayer,  they  concern  themselves  but  little  about  Him. 

It  is  not  therefore  surprising  that  they  should  pass 
tlieir  lives  in  abject  dread  of  evil  spirits,  and,  not 
regarding    God    as   their   protector,    seek   blindly   to 


EARLY  EXPLOREES  OF  QUI  ANA.  37 

propitiate  devils.  Their  belief  in  the  power  of 
demons  is  craftily  fostered  by  a  class  of  men  who 
are  their  sorcerers  or  priests,  who  j^retend  to  hold 
intercourse  with  the  evil  spirits,  and  to  cure  diseases 
by  their  means. 

It  was  long  after  the  discovery  of  the  country  ere 
any  effectual  efforts  were  made  to  bestow  on  its 
aboriginal  inhabitants  the  blessings  of  Christianity 
and  civilization.  The  Europeans  who  first  visited 
its  shores,  sailed  up  its  broad  rivers,  or  penetrated 
its  dense  forests,  had  one  all-absorbing  purpose — the 
rapid  acquisition  of  wealth  in  a  land  of  gold. 

Very  different  from  the  truth  were  the  ideas  which 
prevailed  during  the  sixteenth  century,  and,  to  a 
later  period,  respecting  the  interior  of  Guiana.  It 
was  believed  that  in  the  heart  of  that  country  there 
existed  a  golden  region,  whose  riches  exceeded  those 
of  Peru.  A  branch  of  the  royal  race  of  the  Incas, 
flying  from  their  conquered  country  with  as  much 
wealth  as  could  be  saved  from  the  Spanish  invaders, 
was  said  to  have  established  in  Guiana  a  new  empire. 
As  Manco  Capac,  the  founder  of  that  dynasty,  had 
first  reigned  on  the  shores  of  the  lake  Titicaca,  so 
his  exiled  descendants  were  believed  to  have  fixed 
their  abode  near  a  lake  called  Parima,  the  sands  of 
which  contained  immense  quantities  of  gold.  The 
city  of  Manoa  on  its  banks  had  houses  covered  with 
plates  of  that  precious  metal ;  and  not  only  were  all 
the  vessels  in  the  royal  palace  made  of  the  same,  but 
gold-dust  w^is  so  abundant  that  the  natives  sprinkled 
it  over  their  bodies,  which  they  fii'st  anointed  with 


38  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

a  glutinous  substance,  that  it  miglit  stick  to 
them.^ 

Especially  was  the  person  of  their  sovereign  thus 
adorned  daily  by  his  chamberlains.  "  But,"  says  an 
old  Spanish  writer,^  "as  this  kind  of  garment  would 
be  uneasy  to  him  while  he  slept,  the  prince  washes 
himself  every  evening,  and  is  gilded  anew  in  the 
morning,  tvhich  proves  that  the  empire  of  El  Dorado 
is  infinitely  rich  in  mines."  All  this  was  implicitly 
believed,  and  the  city  of  "  the  gilded "  king  became 
the  object  of  many  expeditions  on  the  part  of  the 
early  Spanish  conquistadores. 

The  German  subjects  of  Charles  V.  vied  with  the 
Spaniards  in  these  bold  adventures.  George  von 
Spier,  with  his  companions,  spent  two  years  in 
penetrating  from  the  northern  shore  of  Terra  Firma 
to  the  Caqueta  (or  Yapura),  a  tributary  of  the 
Amazon.  The  steady  resistance  of  the  Indians  com- 
pelled his  return  in  1537.  The  following  year  three 
small  armies,  led  by  the  conquistadores  Belalcazar, 
Queseda,  and  Federmann,  coming  from  different 
regions,  met  fortuitously  on  the  plains  of  Cundina- 

1  "  On  the  banks  of  the  Caura  and  in  other  wild  parts  of  Guiana, 
where  painting  the  body  is  used  instead  of  tattooing,  the  natives 
anoint  themselves  with  turtle  fat,  and  stick  spangles  of  mica  with 
a  metallic  lustre,  as  white  as  silver,  and  as  red  as  copper,  on  the 
skin,  so  that  at  a  distance  they  seem  to  wear  laced  clothes.  The 
fable  of  the  '  gilded  man '  is  perhaps  founded  on  a  similar 
custom." — Humboldt's  Personal  Narrative  of  Travels  to  the  Equi- 
noctial Begions  of  America,  chap.  xxv. 

'  Oviedo  : — whose  writings,  according  to  Las  Casas,  contain  as 
many  fictions  almost  as  pages. 


EARLY  EXPLOliEnS  OF  GUIANA.  39 

marca/  Not  being  discovered  in  those  parts,  El 
Dorado  was  next  supposed  to  be  somewhere  in  the 
immense  region  between  the  Orinoco  and  the  Amazon, 
— OreUana,  who  first  descended  the  hn^tter  mighty 
stream,  having  reported  that  there  was  a  region  rich 
in  gold  to  the  northward  of  it.  But  as  the  Orinoco 
had  been  pre^dously  explored  from  its  mouth  to  the 
cataracts  by  the  expeditions  of  Ordaz  and  Herrera^ 
with  great  pains  and  little  profit  (the  Indians  fiercely 
opposing  both,  and  the  latter  commander  having  gone 
mad  from  the  efiects  of  a  wound  with  a  poisoned 
arrow),  the  search  was  for  many  years  chiefly  carried 
on  by  land  expeditions  to  the  ivestivard  of  that 
river. 

The  wide-spreading  plains  and  forests  watered  by 
its  large  tributaries,  the  Apure,  Meta,  and  Guaviare, 
were  traversed  from  time  to  time  by  bold  and 
gallantly  equipped  cavaliers ;  each  undeterred  by 
the  total  failure  of  his  predecessors.  One  of  the 
most  famous  of  those  adventurers,  Philip  von  Huten, 
a  German  knight,  at  the  head  of  a  little  band  of 
Spaniards,  marched  in  1541,  amidst  the  greatest 
j^erils  and  privations,  from  Coro,  on  the  northern 
shore  of  the  continent,  to  the  country  of  the  Omaguas 
mentioned  by  OreUana.  The  survivors  of  his  little 
army  being  unable,  in  a  desjDcrate  battle,  to  overcome 
the  resistance  of  that  tribe,  or  to  procure  subsistence, 
were  compelled  to  return, — disappointed,  indeed,  in 
their  attempts  to  reach  the  golden  city,  yet  stiU 
believing  in  its  existence,  and  imagining  that  they 
^  Humboldt's  Narrative,  chap.  xxv. 


40  TEE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

had  seen  its  splendid  roofs  shining  from  afar.  So 
sanguine  was  their  leader  that  he  was  preparing  a 
second  expedition,  when  he  fell  by  the  hand  of  an 
assassin. 

The  weaker  tribes  through  which  those  expeditions 
passed,  desirous  to  get  rid  as  soon  as  possible  of  their 
rapacious  guests,  always  described  El  Dorado  as  easy 
to  be  reached,  and  at  no  great  distance  ;  thus  keeping 
up  the  delusion,  and  luring  on  the  adventurers,  by 
false  hopes,  to  encounter  stronger  foes  and  greater 
dangers. 

Of  those  early  adventurers,  some  had  served  under 
Cortes  in  Mexico,  others  in  Peru  under  Pizarro. 
Great  must  have  been  their  disappointment  on  finding 
that  they  had  exchanged  regions  of  wealth  and  com- 
parative civilization — where  fair  cities,  surrounded  by 
beautiful  gardens  and  fruitful  fields,  abounded — for 
wild  interminable  forests,  swamps,  or  plains  ;  where 
only  assemblages  of  rude  huts  were  to  be  met  with, 
and  they  few  and  far  between.  Nor  could  it  have 
been  gratifying  to  those  veterans  to  have  exchanged, 
as  antagonists,  the  bold  and  gorgeously  equipped 
Aztec  warriors,  who  met  them  in  the  open  field, — 
each  chief 

"  In  golden  glitt'rance,  and  the  feather  mail 
More  gay  than  glitt'ring  gold," — 

for  the  naked  and  painted  savages  whom  they  en- 
countered in  Guiana.  Some  of  these  latter,  especially 
those  of  Carib  race,  were  indeed  formidable  from 
their  headlong  ferocity;   while  the  others,  launching 


EABL Y  EXPLORERS  OF  G UIA NA.  41 

tlieir  poisoned  missiles  from  the  shelter  of  trees  or 
rocks,  must  heave  been,  as  enemies,  equally  dangerous, 
and  still  more  unsatisfactory. 

As  years  passed  on,  the  expeditions  in  search  of 
the  golden  region  increased  in  number.  It  would 
be  wearisome  to  recount  the  names  even  of  those 
leaders  which  have  come  down  to  us.  Men  of 
various  callings  and  of  different « nations,  Portuguese, 
French,  &c.  as  well  as  Spaniards,  were  led  to  join 
in  the  delusive  pursuit. 

About  the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century,  the  search 
for  El  Dorado  was  chiefly  carried  on  in  another 
direction.  Having  been  vainly  sought  elsewhere,  it 
was  thought  that  it  must  he  in  the  eastern  part  of 
Guiana  (as  yet  unexplored),  and  somewhere  near 
the  Caroni. 

Berrio,  the  Spanish  Governor  of  Trinidad,  sent  an 
agent  to  prepare  in  Europe  an  expedition  of  two 
thousand  men ;  and  adventurers,  selling  their  lands, 
embarked  as  on  a  small  crusade  in  that  expedition  ; 
to  which  a  number  of  priests  and  monks  were  attached. 
Of  those  unfortunates,  about  thirty  returned  to  the 
Spanish  settlements,  the  others  having  perished  by 
sickness,  famine,  and  the  weapons  of  the  natives. 

The  terrible  misfortunes  which  befell  the  expedition 
of  Berrio  did  not  deter  his  captor.  Sir  Walter  Ealeigh, 
from  undertaking,  in  159.5,  the  exploration  of  that 
region.  The  natives,  conciliated  by  the  attacks  of  the 
English  on  the  Spaniards,  and  receiving  no  injury 
from  them,  rather  assisted  than  opposed  him  ;  and  his 
expedition  was  only  stopped  by  the   cataracts  of  the 


42  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

Caroni.  But,  though  he  prociu^ed  specimens  of  auri- 
ferous quartz/  he  of  course  did  not  discover  the 
wealthy  monarch  of  the  lake,  and  his  golden  city. 

No  failure,  however,  could  dispel  those  visionary 
ideas  and  dreams  of  boundless  riches.  Some  of 
Ealeigh's  men  declared  that  they  saw,  near  the 
Caroni,  rocks  shining  with  gold,  and  a  mountain 
"  containing  diamonds  and  other  valuable  stones,  the 
lustre  of  which  is  often  seen  to  blaze  at  a  consider- 
able distance."^ 

The  other  famous  expedition  of  Sir  W.  Ealeigh 
to  Guiana,  the  unfortunate  issue  of  which  brought 
him  to  the  scaffold,  did  not  take  place  till  1617, 
after  his  disgrace  and  long  imprisonment.  During 
that  interval  his  interest  in  the  country  continued 
unabated.  Being  prevented  from  continuing  his 
enterprises  in  person,  he  sent  his  faithful  adherent, 
Captain  Keymis,  and  others,  to  explore  its  coast  and 
rivers. 

Those  expeditions,  pursuing  the  same  course,  made 
land  to  windward,  near  the  mouth  of  the  Amazon. 
They  then   proceeded   in  a   north-westerly   direction 

^  The  enemies  of  the  brave  and  unfortunate  Ealeigh  pretended 
to  believe  that  those  specimens  were  not  found  in  Guiana.  But 
time  has  brought  his  full  vindication  from  that  charge  of  imposture. 
There  have  been  "diggings"  for  some  time  between  the  Caroni  and 
Cuyuni.  Gold  was  also  discovered  by  Mr.  M'Clintock  in  May 
1860,  on  the  Warili,  a  tributary  of  the  latter,  and  a  company  has 
been  since  formed  to  work  it.  Quartz  containing  gold  I  have  myself 
met  with  in  another  district,  and  it  is  probably  widely  scattered, 
though  in  most  places  too  poor  as  regards  the  precious  metal  to 
repay  the  search  for  it. 

2    Vide  "Ealeigh's  Yoyages." 


EARLY  EXPLOBEBS  OF  GUIANA.  .   43 

along  a  tliousanil  miles  of  coast  covered  witli  ver- 
dant forest ;  the  low  and  level  line  of  wliicli  was 
only  broken  by  a  few  hills  in  the  eastern  part.  No 
sign  of  civihzation  existed  on  that  wild  shore  :  thouorh 
the  casual  appearance  of  Indians,  predatory  or  fish- 
ino;  in  then-  canoes,  and  the  distant  smoke  arisins^ 
from  some  bmiiing  "field"  inland,  would  show  tliat 
the  country  was  inhabited. 

The  larger  rivers,  whose  presence  was  indicated 
by  wide  openings  in  the  dense  line  of  mangrove 
and  courida  trees,  were  entered  and  explored.  The 
Oyapok  and  ]Marowini  were  ascended  as  far  as  their 
first  falls.  The  Corentyn  was  also  explored  several 
days'  voyage  above  the  Indian  town  Orealla ;  and  the 
Essequibo  to  a  much  greater  distance.  The  names 
and  positions  of  the  smaller  streams  were  also  accu- 
rately laid  do\\ai.  But  the  chief  object  of  those 
English  navigators  was  to  gather  information  which 
might  tend  to  fix  the  site  of  the  golden  city ;  and 
Keymis,  in  exploring  the  Essequibo,  carefully  noted 
the  report  that,  by  ascending  its  tributary,  the  Eu- 
pununi,  a  communication  might  be  opened  with  the 
lake  Parima.' 

^  The  wonders  of  the  ISTew  World,  and  llie  immense  wealth  ac- 
quired by  the  Spanish  conquerors  in  many  parts  of  it,  had  greatly 
inflamed  the  imaginations  of  those  explorers.  ISTothing  seemed 
incredible  to  them,  if  it  gratified  their  love  of  the  marvellous,  and 
favoured  their  golden  dreams.  They  everywhere  saw,  or  fancied 
they  saw,  traces  of  the  precious  metals.  The  captain  and  crew  of 
an  English  vessel,  which  about  that  time  explored  the  Marowini, 
declared  that  they  had  seen  on  its  banks  "  a  gigantic  race  of  men, 
who  carried  in  their  hands  bows  of  gold  :" — whether  for  ornament 
or  use  we  are  not  informed.     (Drake's  Voyages,  p.  296.) 


44  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

It  was  in  the  direction  thus  indicated, — the  terri- 
tory (then  unexplored)  between  the  Essequibo  and 
the  heads  of  the  Caroni  and  Eio  Branco, — that  the 
search  for  El  Dorado  was  subsequently  carried  on  by 
adventurers  from  the  Orinoco  and  the  Amazon.  The 
fact  that  it  had  been  vainly  sought  in  other  direc- 
tions only  increased  their  certainty  that  it  would  be 
found  there.  And  the  exaggerated  reports  of  the 
Indians  concerning  a  lake  with  ghttering  islands 
(by  which  it  is  now  supposed  that  the  little  Amucu 
was  intended),  helped  to  strengthen  the  delusion. 
— Thus,  having  been  vainly  followed  from  west  to 
east  across  the  wide  continent,  like  a  phantom  con- 
tinually evading  its  pursuers,  the  fable  made  a  last 
stand,  previous  to  its  final  disappearance,  near  the 
boundaries   or  within  the  limits  of  our  province. 

No  expeditions  of  numerous  bands  of  colonists 
have  taken  place  within  the  last  two  centuries,  but 
enterprises  by  daring  adventurers  were  encouraged 
by  the  Governors  of  the  Spanish  and  Portuguese 
territories.  Some  of  the  unfortunates,  who  from 
time  to  time  set  out  on  those  wild  journeys,  feU  by 
the  hands  of  the  natives,  others  by  famine  and  fa- 
tigue. In  the  last  expedition  (1775-6)  hundreds 
perished.^  It  is  said  that  only  one  man  returned 
to  tell  the  fate  of  his  comrades. 

But,  long  before  that  delusion  ended,  colonies  had 

been   planted   by  the    Dutch,  French,   and   English, 

along  the  Atlantic  coast,  and  a  way  to  wealth  adopted 

in  cultivating  the  fertile  soil,  which  was  not  followed 

1  Humboldt's  Views  of  Nature,  p.  188. 


EARLY  EXPLORERS  OF  GUIANA.  45 

by  the  disappoiutment  attending  the  seekers  of  El 
Dorado. 

The  Dutch  had,  as  early  as  1580,  tried  to  establisli 
small  trading  posts  on  the  Pomeroon  and  Abari, 
which  the  attacks  of  the  Spaniards  as  well  as  of  the 
natives  compelled  them  to  abandon.  But  at  the 
beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century  they  succeeded 
in  planting  a  colony  on  the  Essequibo,  and  fortified 
a  small  island  at  the  junction  of  the  Masaruni  with 
the  Cuyuni,  which  they  named  Kyk-over-al.  This 
was  at  first  their  seat  of  government,  which  was 
afterwards  removed  to  Fort  Island,  near  the  mouth 
of  the  Essequibo. 

Some  years  after,  a  company,  headed  by  Jan  Van 
Peere,  founded  a  colony  on  the  river  Berbice,  and 
protected  it  by  a  fort  named  Nassau.  The  power 
of  the  Hollanders  then  gradually  spread  over  the 
western  part  of  the  coast  of  Guiana. 

The  wild  Indian  tribes  remained  sole  possessors 
of  the  eastern  part  for  some  years  longer.  They 
were  noted  for  their  ferocity,  and  Father  Sala,  a 
Spanish  missionary  and  seeker  of  El  Dorado,  had 
been  put  to  death  by  them  while  endeavouring  to 
penetrate  their  country  in   1560. 

At  length  the  French,  who  had  repeatedly  at- 
tempted to  settle  on  the  coast  of  Brazil,  and  been 
as  often  repulsed  by  the  Portuguese,  turned  their 
attention  to  the  country  north  of  the  Amazon. 
Twenty-six  colonists,  sent  by  a  company  formed 
at  Kouen,  settled  in  1G26  on  the  Sinamari.  A  few 
years  later,   a   larger  number  took  possession  of  the 


46  THE    INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

island  of  Cayenne,  and  built  a  small  fort  on  a  hill 
called  Ceperou,  after  a  celebrated  Indian  chief  of 
that  name. 

These  attempts  met  with  little  success.  The  sur- 
vivors of  those  bands  were  found  some  years  after 
living  ill  the  uncivilized  manner  of  the  Indians  around 
them,  and  using  their  language. 

A  more  energetic  attempt  at  colonization  was  made 
in  1644,  by  300  men  under  M.  de  Bretigny.  But 
the  Galibis  (or  Caribs),  exasperated  by  oppression, 
destroyed  the  infant  settlement  and  massacred  the 
inhabitants ;  forty  colonists  and  some  Capuchin  mis- 
sionaries alone  escaping.  The  triumphant  Indians 
put  to  death  two  other  Capuchins  (who  unhappily 
arrived  at  that  period)  with  sixteen  of  their  fellow- 
voyagers.  They  also  attacked  and  destroyed  a  body 
of  forty  fresh  colonists,  only  one  of  whom  escaped  the 
slaughter. 

Another  attempt  at  colonization,  made  in  1652  by 
about  800  men,  totally  failed,  through  civil  strife, 
followed  by  anarchy,  famine,  and  the  attacks  of  the 
natives.  It  was  not  until  twelve  years  later  that  the 
French,  under  M.  de  la  Barre,  succeeded  in  firmly 
fixing  themselves  in  Cayenne.^ 

On  the  establishment  of  the  colony  the  Jesuits  were 
charged  with  its  religious  service,  and  received  grants 
of  land.  Having  formed  parishes  and  stations  on 
the  coast,  they  turned  their  attention  to  the  interior, 
then  almost  unknown. 

A  small  expedition  had  in  1652  reached  the  country 
^  La  Guyane  Frangaise,  by  M.  Leon  Kiviere,  chap.  i. 


EARLY  EXPLORERS  OF  GUIANA.  47 

of  the  Racalet  Indians,  and  been  well  received  by 
them.  Heavy  rains  had  then  prevented  further  ex- 
ploration. 

But  in  the  year  1674,  Fathers  Grillet  and  Bechamel 
ascended  the  Oyapok  and  Aproague  ;  and,  having 
visited  the  chief  of  the  Nouragues,  penetrated  to 
the  country  of  the  Acoquas.  There  they  heard 
that  some  Englishmen,  who  had  preceded  them  in 
the  dangerous  exploration  of  that  region,  had  been 
captured  and  eaten  by  the  natives.  Descending  the 
rivers,  after  enduring  much  fatigue  and  privation, 
followed  by  sickness,  the  two  enterprising  priests 
returned  to  Cayenne,  and  died  soon  after. 

This  exploration  was  followed  by  others,  under- 
taken by  the  government  of  the  colony  or  by  private 
persons,  in  the  interests  of  science  and  commerce. 
They  increased  the  knowledge  already  acquii-ed  of 
the  interior  and  its  inhabitants. 

In  the  early  part  of  the  eighteenth  century,  the 
Jesuit  fathers  attempted  the  establishment  of  missions 
in  Cayenne  on  the  model  of  those  in  Paraguay. — 
Commencing  with  the  Indians  near  the  coast,  they 
gradually  extended  their  labours  to  the  interior. 
In  1729  Pere  Fauque,  accompanied  by  Sergeant 
Duvillard,  was  favourably  received  by  the  chief  of  the 
Acoquas.  The  result  of  their  efibrts  was  the  establish- 
ment, by  the  year  1738,  of  three  principal  stations 
or  points  of  meeting  among  the  native  tribes, — on 
the  Oyapok,  the  Camopi,  and  near  the  Ouanari.  In 
1744  an  Anglo-American  privateer  (or  pirate)  having 
forced    the    ill-defended     entrance    of    the    Oyapok, 


48  TEE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

barbarously  destroyed  one  of  their  churches,  and  put 
the  Indians  to  flight.^ 

In  1762  the  labours  of  the  Jesuit  missionaries  in 
Cayenne,  as  on  the  Orinoco  and  elsewhere,  were 
brought  to  a  sudden  end  by  the  suppression  of  their 
order.  ^ 

While  the  French  were  struggling  with  the  natives 
for  the  possession  of  Cayenne,  some  English  colonists 
had  attempted  to  settle  at  Paramaribo,  and  been 
driven  off  by  the  Caribs,  who  had  formerly  lived  there. 

1  La  Guayane  Frangaise,  chaps,  ix. — xviii. 

2  During  the  seventeenth  and  eighteenth  centuries,  the  labours 
of  the  missionaries  of  the  Church  of  Eome  secured  the  submission 
and  obedience  of  many  barbarous  American  tribes.  Among  the 
various  orders  the  Jesuits  were  pre-eminent  in  zeal,  in  labours,  and 
in  influence,  until  the  jealousy  excited  by  their  vast  and  growing 
power,  and  the  distrust  with  which  they  were  regarded  by  the 
Roman  Catholic  Governments  in  Europe,  led  to  their  suppression. 

Their  missions,  though  far  apart,  at  that  time  nearly  surrounded 
Guiana.  They  occupied  the  most  important  situations  on  the 
Orinoco,  were  planted  at  its  great  cataracts,  Atures  and  Maypures, 
and  above  them.  Their  missionaries  also  had  their  share  in  the 
discovery  of  the  great  natural  canal  of  the  Cassiquiare,  and  by  it 
had  opened  communication  with  the  stations  of  their  Portuguese 
brethren  on  the  Eio  Negro  and  Amazon. 

When  Humboldt,  nearly  forty  years  after,  visited  these  stations, 
he  found  them  occupied  by  the  Franciscans,  but  the  period  of  their 
highest  prosperity  had  passed  away.  The  missions  of  the  Catalo- 
nian  Capuchins  at  Upata,  near  the  Caroni,  were,  however,  at  that 
time  flourishing.  One  or  two  other  missions  had  been  founded 
by  Spaniards  (1780-83)  south  of  the  Pacaraima  Mountains, 
chiefly,  it  would  seem,  te  encroach  on  the  Brazilian  frontier. 
These  perished  in  a  short  time,  and  the  great  revolution  which 
in  the  early  part  of  the  present  century  destroyed  the  power  of  Old 
Spain  on  the  American  continent  brought  calamity  and  ruin  on 
the  others. 


EARLY  EXPLORERS  OF  GULANA.  49 

In  a  second  attempt  they  met  with  less  opposition. 
The  colony  of  Surinam  was  then  estahlished  by  them, 
which  in  the  reign  of  Charles  II.  was  given  over  to 
the  Dutch  in  exchange  for  what  is  now  the  State  of 
New  York. 

The  Dutch  possessions,  Surinam,  Berbice,  and  Esse- 
quibo,  then  extended  in  an  unbroken  line  from  French 
to  Spanish  Guiana.  Another  colony  was  planted  by 
them  on  the  Demerara  between  the  years  1740  and 
1773,  which  was  soon  after  united  to  that  of  Esse- 
quibo.  The  seat  of  government  was  at  first  on  the 
little  island  called  Borselen,  but  was  in  the  next  year 
removed  to  Stabroek,  the  present  GeorgetOA\m. 

The  early  settlements  of  the  Dutch  were  greatly 
harassed  by  the  Indians.  They  at  length  succeeded 
in  attaching  to  themselves  the  Arawak  nation,  which 
had  from  time  immemorial  sufifered  from  the  hostility 
of  the  Caribs,  and  now  aided  the  whites  in  repressing 
their  incursions.  In  course  of  time  all  the  Indian 
races  became  friendly  to  the  colonists  ;  seeing  that 
they  procured  slaves  from  Africa,  and  did  not  deprive 
them  of  their  libert}^^     Presents  were  also  periodically 

1  Thougli  the  colonists  made  no  incursions  on  the  Indian  tribes 
for  the  purpose  of  enslaving  them,  they  encouraged  them  in  the 
capture  of  each  other,  and  purchased  the  slaves  so  taken.  It  is, 
however,  certain  that  the  system  of  enslaving  each  |other  did  not 
then  commence,  but  had  existed  among  the  aborigines  of  Guiana 
(as  among  the  nations  of  Africa)  from  the  earliest  times.  Their 
discoverers  found  it  in  full  force.  "  Francis  Sparrow,"  whom  Sir 
"VV.  lialeigh  left  to  explore  the  countr}',  "bought,  to  the  southward 
of  the  Orinoco,  eight  beautiful  young  Avomen,  the  eldest  not  eighteen 
years  of  age,  for  a  red-handled  knife,  the  value  of  which  in  England 
at  that  time  was  but  one  halfpenny." — Drake's  Voi/agcs,  p.  295. 

E 


50  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

distributed  among  tlie  tribes  at  certain  stations  called 
Indian  "posts,"  and  tbeir  services  thus  secured  as 
allies  against  the  runaway  slaves  or  bush-negroes. 

The  latter,  knowing  the  resentment  of  the  Indians 
against  them,  as  intruders  into  their  territories,  waged 
exterminating  war  with  the  red  men  whenever  they 
absconded  in  numbers  sufficient  to  make  good  their 
position.  When  a  sohtary  negro  ran  away,  he  was 
often  reduced  by  hunger  to  the  necessity  of  coming 
by  night  to  the  field  of  the  Indian,  and  robbing  it. 
As  soon  as  the  depredation  was  discovered,  he  was 
tracked,  if  possible,  to  his  lurking-place ;  and  either 
taken  alive  and  led  to  the  plantations,  or,  if  he 
resisted,  put  to  death.  Sometimes,  however,  the 
Indian  apparently  took  no  notice,  but  waited  till  a 
clear  moonlight  night,  when,  placing  himself  upon  a 
rude  frame  among  the  branches  of  a  tree,  he  shot 
the  unfortunate  marauder  as  he  would  any  wild 
beast. 

It  was  in  the  times  of  such  wild  bush-warfare 
that  the  Moravians  planted  their  first  missions  in 
Dutch  Guiana. 

Those  missions  were  resolved  on  by  the  Moravian 
Brethren  after  many  consultations  between  Bishop 
Spangenberg,  one  of  their  most  influential  members, 
and  the  Directors  of  the  Dutch  Trading  Company 
of  Surinam. 

Two  of  tbe  Brethren  were  first  sent,  at  the  request 
of  a  gentleman  of  Amsterdam,  to  his  estate  on  the 
river  Berbice,  in  the  year  1738.  Circumstances  soon 
induced  them  to  go  higher  up  the   river ;    and   on 


EABLY  EXPLORERS  OF  GUIANA.  51 

the  estate  Savonette  they  founded  a  station  called 
"Pilgerhut,"  whence  they  made  long  journeys  to 
the  Indian  settlements  around.  A  mulatto  boy,  who 
had  been  given  to  them  by  a  planter,  and  understood 
the  Ai-awiik  language,  was  of  great  use  to  them  as 
an  interpreter,  and  translated  into  that  language  a 
narrative  of  the  life  and  sufferings  of  Christ. 

That  branch  of  labour  was  taken  up  by  T.  Schuman, 
a  man  of  learning  and  talent,  who  superintended 
the  station  for  twelve  years.  Many  Arawaks  had 
by  that  time  joined  them ;  and  a  few  even  had 
been  brought  by  their  friends  from  the  Spanish 
teiTitory. 

A  terrible  epidemic  then  visited  the  colony,  which 
carried  off  the  Governor,  and  many  others,  both 
uf  the  colonists  and  Indians.  Schuman  and  two 
other  missionaries  died  in  1760,  and  two  years  later 
only  twenty-three  members  of  their  flock  remained, 
while  the  garrison  of  the  colony  was  diminished  to 
twenty  men. 

The  station  was  totally  destroyed  during  the 
terrible  revolt  of  the  Berbice  negroes  in  1763.  Of 
the  missionaries,  who  with  difiiculty  escaped  to  the 
Demerara,  all  but  two  returned  to  Europe.  Those 
two,  Cleman  and  Vester,  who  nobly  remained  for 
further  labour,  died  soon  after.  This  was  the  sad 
end  of  the  Moravian  mission  on  the  Berbice,  after 
a   promising  course  of  twenty-five  years. 

In  1739,  the  i\Ioravians  had  also  founded  a  mission 
on  the  Cottica  m  Surinam,  which  only  lasted  five 
years.     Another  on  the  Saramaca  was  established  in 

E  2 


52  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

1757,  and  called  "Sharon."  This  was  burnt  down 
four  years  after  by  the  bush  negroes,  who  craftily 
attacked  it  on  a  Sunday,  slew  some  of  the  Indians, 
and  carried  oif  others,  leaving  one  of  the  missionaries, 
badly  wounded,  with  the  dead  bodies  on  the  ground. 
This  station  was  finally  abandoned  in  1779,  in  con- 
sequence of  their  unrelenting  hostility. 

The  mission  on  the  Corentyn,  established  in  1757, 
had  a  longer  existence.  It  was  commenced  by 
Daehne,  one  of  their  most  eminent  men,  at  a  place 
which  he  called  "  Ephraim."  Here  he  laboured, 
though  sometimes  left  quite  alone,  and  exposed  to 
danger  from  wild  beasts  and  reptiles.  That  place 
they  were  forced  to  abandon  when  the  Berbice  mis- 
sion was  destroyed.  They  afterwards  went  higher 
up  the  eastern  or  Surinam  bank  of  the  Corentyn, 
and  called  their  new  settlement  "  Hope."  This  was 
very  prosperous  for  about  twenty  years ;  l3ut  small- 
pox and  other  calamities  caused  it  to  decline  after 
its  founder  had  gone  to  his  rest.  Fischer,  an  active 
and  talented  missionary,  revived  it  greatly  by  his 
zeal  and  acquirement  of  the  Arawak  tongue,  and 
by  opening  a  school  for  the  young ;  but  the  Surinam 
Government  ordered  him  to  quit  it  about  the  end 
of  the  century.  Depression  and  calamity  followed 
this  blow.  The  whole  of  the  mission  buildino-s 
were  burnt  down  in  1806.  The  small-pox  carried 
off  many  of  the  Christian  Indians,  and  dispersed 
the  remainder,  causing  its  abandonment  two  years 
after.  An  attempt  was  made  to  revive  it  by  two 
fresh  missionaries  in  1812,  but  they  soon  after  re- 


EARLY  EXPLOBEES  OF  GUIANA.  53 

moved  to  a  wider  field  of  usefulness,  among  the 
negroes  of  the  plantations  on  the  Nikeri,  near  the 
mouth  of  the  Corentyn.  The  labours  of  the  Moravians 
among  the  black  population  of  Surinam  have  since 
been  very  successful,  but  the  work  among  the  Indians 
was  abandoned.^ 

When  Bishop  Coleridge  (of  Barbados),  Archdeacon 
Austin  (since  Bishop  of  Guiana),  and  others  visited 
the  Corentyn  in  1839,  they  heard  an  old  blind  Indian 
sing  the  well-remembered  hynms  which  he  had 
learned  from  the  Moravians  when  a  boy  at  their 
school.  But  of  the  labours  of  the  Brethren,  even  at 
this,  their  longest  held  and  last  relinquished  post,  few 
other  traces  remained. 

The  country  in  which  the  Moravians  laboured  was 
in  many  respects  highly  favourable  to  missionary  ex- 
ertion. Its  rivers  are  bordered  by  high  and  healthy 
savannah  lands.  Dangerous  rapids  do  not  abound, 
as  in  the  Essequibo  and  its  large  tributaries ;  nor 
vast  swamps,  most  difficult  to  traverse  and  prejudicial 
to  health,  as  in  the  more  western  region,  through 
which  flow  the  Pomeroon,  Moruca,  Waini,  and  other 
streams.  But  the  times  were  unfavourable  to  them. 
They    had   to    contend,    not    only   with   that    which 

1  See  "HistoricalSketchesof  Missions  of  the  United  Bretkren,"&c. 
Most  of  the  black  population  professing  Christianity  in  Siiriuam 
have  been  indebted  to  the  labours  of  the  Moravian  Brethren.  They 
have  used  the  common  (or  "  talkie-talkie  ")  dialect  of  the  colony. 
At  Paramaribo  they  have  had  an  establishment  at  which  new- 
comers from  Europe  were  obliged  to  spend  a  certain  time,  that 
they  miglit  become  familiar  with  the  language  of  the  people  among 
whom  they  would  have  to  minister. 


54  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

everj  missionary  expects — tlie  opposition  of  tlie  wild 
heathen, — but  were  also  thwarted  continually  by  the 
open  or  covert  animosity  of  the  colonists  around 
them.  Evil  were  the  reports  propagated  (and  be- 
lieved) at  that  time  in  Surinam  agaiust  men  whose 
memories  are  now  held  in  honour. 


CHAPTER  lY. 

THE    ESSEQUIBO    AND    ITS    TRIBUTARIES. 

The  Essequibo — Its  Size  and  Beauty — Bartica,  &c. — The  Indian 
Xations  near  the  Coast — The  Macusis — Stations  among  theui 
destroyed  by  the  Brazilians. 

The  Essequibo  is  the  largest  stream  between  the 
Amazon  and  the  Orinoco.  Durino-  the  seventeenth 
century  the  Dutch,  as  has  been  said,  planted  a  small 
colony  at  its  junction  ^vith  two  large  tributaries, 
the  Masaruni  and  Cuyuni.  The  seat  of  govern- 
ment was  removed,  and  few  of  their  settlements 
now  remain. 

The  wide  sea-reach  of  that  noble  river,  which  was 
called  by  the  Indians  "  the  younger  brother  of  the 
Orinoco,"  extends  thirty -five  or  forty  miles  from  its 
mouth,  with  an  average  breadth  of  seven  or  eight. 
This  expanse  of  Avater,  with  its  distant  banks  and 
intervening  islands  covered  witli  the  exuberant  ver- 
dure of  a  tropical  forest,  has,  in  many  parts,  rather 
the  appearance  of  a  lake  than  of  a  river  ;  and  the  Ijlue 
hills  peeping  above  the  horizon  in  the  distant  south 
add  to  its  beauty,  and  form  a  pleashig  contrast  to  the 
dead  level  of  the  coast.  Near  Ampa,  a  settlement 
on  the  eastern  bank,  al)0ut  thirty  miles  from  the  sea, 


56  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

some  picturesque  rocky  islands  rise  abruptly  from  the 
water ;  and  four  miles  beyond,  on  the  opposite  side, 
the  united  streams  of  the  Masaruni  and  Cuyuni 
flow  into  it  by  a  mouth  one  mile  in  breadth.  The 
southern  point  of  their  confluence,  called  Bartica, 
was  selected  as  the  site  of  an  Indian  station. 

The  work  there  was  commenced  in  1829  by  Mr. 
Armstrong,  one  of  those  laymen  who,  as  catechists, 
did  at  that  time  much  good  service  in  the  colony. 
He  for  four  years  bore  alone  the  burden  and  heat  of  • 
the  day.  He  dwelt  in  a  thatched  cottage,  and  tra- 
velled from  place  to  place  among  the  people.  After  a 
time  a  rude  chapel- school  was  erected.  The  Eev.  Mr. 
Youd  then  succeeded  him.  In  1836  the  measles 
nearly  destroyed  this  station,  carrying  off  seventy 
Indians.  Mr.  Youd  soon  after  undertook  a  mission 
to  the  Macusi  tribe  in  the  distant  interior,  for  which 
the  way  had  been  prepared  by  a  previous  visit  of 
Mr.  Armstrong. 

The  Eev.  J.  H.  Bernau  then  took  charge  of  Bartica, 
and  in  his  zealous  labours  was  afterwards  assisted  by 
other  missionaries. 

In  1840  I  saw  at  that  station  an  excellent  school, 
filled  with  little  Indians  ;  a  new  chapel  was  after- 
wards erected,  and  its  prosperity  increased.  Strangers 
visited  the  mission  to  behold  and  admire  its  progress, 
and  numerous  settlers  asked  permission  to  reside  there 
and  share  its  benefits. 

The  stations  commenced  by  Mr.  Armstrong  and 
Mr.  Youd  were  supported  by  the  efforts  of  the  English 
Church     Missionary    Society ;     and    their    successful 


THE  ESSEQVIBO  AND  ITS  TRIBUTARIES.  57 

revival  of  missionary  labour  among  the  aborigines 
was  followed  by  efiforts  of  a  similar  nature  by  other 
relioious  bodies. 

At  Caria-caria,  lower  down  the  Essequibo,  a  number 
of  Indians  were  gathered  under  Mr.  Peters ;  who 
some  years  after  formed  another  station  in  that 
neighbourhood,  the  former  being  continued  under  the 
.supervision  of  the  Kev.  J.  Ketley. 

In  November  1841,  a  station  in  connexion  with 
the  Church  of  Scotland  was,  by  the  aid  of  Messrs.  G. 
and  W.  Jeffrey,  established  near  their  wood-cutting 
establishment,  at  Indiana,  on  the  Supenaam.  The 
Kev.  R.  Duff,  who  opened  that  mission,  has  given  a 
full  account  of  its  establishment  and  subsequent 
history.^ 

The  ffrst  and  grand  difficulty  in  the  way  of  evan- 
o-elizino-  those  Indians  was  found  to  be  the  number  of 
distinct  tribes  or  nations,  with  their  various  languages. 
One  who  had  a  better  opportunity  than  any  other  of 
examining  the  country  thus  wrote  : — "  The  numl^er  of 
vocabularies  which  I  collected  during  my  voyages  was 
eighteen,  none  of  which  bear  a  closer  affinity  to  each 
other  than  the  French  and  Italian."^ 

One  of  the  most  striking  instances  of  this  diver- 
sity is  seen  immediately  on  quitting  the  coast  of  our 
province.  Three  nations,  the  Arawak,  AVarau,  and 
Carib,  may  be  found  residing  close  to  each  other  on 
the  rivers  Pomcroon  and  ]\Ioruca,   and    also  on   the 

*  Notes  on  British  Guiana,  cliap.  xi. 

2  Sir  11.  Scliomburgk.  One  half  at  least  of  that  number  must 
have  been  collected  beyond  our  boundary. 


58  TEE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

Corentyn ;  and  tliey  have  dwelt  so  for  at  least  three 
centuries,  and  yet  no  intermixture  has  taken  place 
in  their  respective  languages.  They  are  of  different 
origin,  and  remain  distinct. 

Those  three  tribes,  with  the  Acawoio,  have  been  the 
principal  subjects  of  missionary  labour. 

The  first  of  these,  the  Arawak,  is  the  least  barbarous 
of  all  the  tribes.  Their  settlements  are  scattered  in 
an  extended  line,  generally  within  one  hundred  miles 
of  the  sea,  from  the  Orinoco  to  the  Marowini.  Their 
ideas  of  spiritual  things  are  those  briefly  stated  in 
the  last  chapter.  They  call  the  Supreme  Being  "  Wa- 
cinaci"  (our  Father),  "  Wa'murretikwonci "  (our 
Maker),  and  "  Aiomun  Kondi"  (the  Dweller  on  High). 
Their  sorcerers  are  called  "  Semecici,"  and  the  evil 
sjDirits  "  Yauhahu." 

The  Warau  tribe  comes  next.  Their  settlements 
are  numerous  along  the  swampy  coast  district  extend- 
ing from  the  Pomeroon  to  the  Orinoco,  the  delta  of 
which  may  be  considered  their  head-quarters  ;  and  a 
few  are  found  as  far  east  as  Surinam.  They  some- 
times use  the  word  "  Kororomana "  wdien  speaking  of 
God  ;  but  it  is  doubtful  what  ideas  some  of  them 
attach  to  that  name.  Concerning  the  title  "  Kano- 
natu  "  (our  Maker)  there  is,  however,  no  doubt.  The 
evil  spirits  they  call  "Hebo." 

The  Caribi  tribe,  famous  in  history,  is  regarded 
with  some  degree  of  awe  by  the  others  even  now,  when 
verging  on  extinction.  Their  numbers  have  been 
estimated  at  300,  500,  and  even  100.  All  these  are 
much  too  low.     We  found  in  the  neighbourhood  of  our 


THE  ESSEQUIBO  AND  ITS  TRIBUTARIES.  59 

western  missions  more  tlian  400  of  tliat  tribe,  whose 
existence  seems  to  have  been  quite  unknown  to  those 
who  estimated  their  numbers  as  above.  They  have, 
however,  rapidly  diminished  during  the  last  century. 
They  call  the  Great  Father,  "  Tamosi  Kabo-tano  "  (the 
Ancient  of  Heaven),  and  the  e"sdl  spirits  "  Yurokon," 

The  Acawoios  are  the  most  w^andering  in  their 
habits  of  all  the  tribes.  Their  language  has  a  strong 
affinity  to  that  of  the  Caribs,  but  is  more  complex 
and  difficult  to  acquire.  "Makonaima"  is  their 
name  for  the  Supreme  Being,  and  the  evil  s}>irits 
they   call  "  Imawari." 

Of  the  above-named  tribes,  a  particular  account 
will  be  given,  as  each  passes  under  our  notice,  in  the 
course  of  the  following  narrative. 

There  is,  however,  one  tribe,  yet  unnoticed,  of  con- 
siderable importance,  the  Macusi,  which  occupies  the 
open  and  often  inundated  savannahs  of  the  distant 
interior.  Schomburgk,  who  saw  much  of  them,  esti- 
mated their  total  number  at  about  3,000.  The  site 
of  the  mission  undertaken  to  this  tribe  by  the  Eev. 
Mr.  Youd  was  first  fixed  at  Pirara,  on  the  banks  of 
the  small  lake  called  Amucu  ;  which  is  thought,  from 
the  geological  structure  of  the  surrounding  country,  to 
have  been  much  larger  formerly  than  it  is  at  j)resent. 
It  is  supposed  to  have  given  origin  to  the  fable  of 
the  Lake  Parima  and  El  Dorado,^     This,  which  may 

^  During  the  last  century,  the  colonists  fully  believed  m  the 
existence  of  the  inland  sea  or  lake  of  I'arima,  but  they  placed  it 
farther  north.  An  old  Dutch  -writer  says,  "  It  is  ^;?'o*'('J  to  be 
situated  between  the  rivers  Masserouny  and  Cajouny;  a  very  large 


60  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

in  a  measure  be  considered  as  classic  ground,  was  tlie 
spot  selected  for  the  mission  to  the  Macusis. 

Mr.  Youd's  first  service  among  them,  as  described 
by  himself,  was  an  interesting  though  grotesque  scene. 
Many  of  the  Macusis  came  armed,  some  with  cut- 
lasses, others  with  bows  and  arrows.  Some  wore 
their  feathered  crowns  and  other  ornaments ;  and 
all,  with  the  exception  of  their  chief,  were  profusely 

and  deep  sea,  the  border  of  which  is  inhabited  by  populous  nations, 
without  allowing  any  stranger  to  come  to  them.  The  Spaniards 
have  made  abortive  attempts  at  discovery,  and  even,  by  the  report 
of  an  Indian  chief,  in  1755  were  repeatedly  repulsed  in  attempts 
at  invasion,  having,  however,  taken  to  Oronoque  four  of  those 
clothed  people." — Hartsinck's  Ussequibo,  Demerary,  and  Berhice, 
1770. 

Where  that  "  very  large  and  deep  sea "  was  then  supposed  to 
be,  the  mountain  region  of  Eoraima  is  now  known  to  exist. 

Hillhouse,  who,  in  1830  and  subsequently,  ascended  the  Masa- 
runi,  thought  that  its  romantic  valley  had  been  once  the  bed  of 
an  immense  lake,  ten  or  twelve  miles  in  width,  and  1,500  or 
2,000  in  length,  which  burst  its  barriers  long  ago ;  and  that  the 
remembrance  of  it,  preserved  among  the  Indians,  had  given  rise  to 
the  celebrated  fable. 

Lastly,  Schomburgk  speaks  of  the  banks  of  the  little  rushy  lake 
Amucu  as  the  supposed  site  of  the  imperial  and  golden  city  of 
Manoa.  Humboldt,  agreeing  in  that  opinion,  says  :  "  Here,  in  a 
river  called  Parima,  and  a  small  lake  connected  with  it,  called 
Amucu,  we  have  basis  enough  on  which  to  found  the  belief  of  the 
great  lake  bearing  the  name  of  the  former ;  and  in  the  islets  and 
rocks  of  mica-slate  and  talc  which  rise  up  within  and  around  the 
latter,  we  have  materials  out  of  which  to  form  that  gorgeous 
capital,  whose  temj)les  and  houses  were  overlaid  with  plates  of 
beaten  gold." 

That  question,  which  cost  so  many  lives  and  so  much  discussion 
during  three  centuries,  may  now  be  considered  as  exhausted,  if  not 
satisfactorily  settled. 


THE  ESSEQUIBO  AND  ITS  TBIBUTAlilES.  Gl 

painted  on  face,  arms,  and  legs.  Some,  during  ser- 
vice, occupied  themselves  in  detecting  vermin  ;  others, 
with  the  inveterate  shpiess  of  Indian  nature,  turned 
their  backs  on  the  minister,  or  lounged  with  affected 
carelessness  against  the  j^osts  of  the  rude  chapel  they 
had  built.  On  the  first  Sunday,  there  were  156  pre- 
sent. The  morning  service  was  conducted  through 
an  interpreter ;  that  in  the  evening  was  in  English, 
for  the  benefit  of  the  very  few  who  had  come  with 
the  missionary,  and  could  understand  it. 

The  mission  soon  flourished,  and  gave  prospect  of 
the  speedy  conversion  of  that  tribe  and  of  others. 
But  it  unfortunately  became  an  object  of  jealousy  to 
the  Brazilians.  Its  ruin  was  resolved  on,  and  carried 
out  in  a  manner  strangely  contrasting  with  the  con- 
duct of  the  Government  of  our  colony,  which,  from 
1837,  had  not  only  tolerated,  but  mainly  suj)ported 
a  mission  of  the  Koman  Church  on  or  within  our 
western  boundary. 

A  descimento,  or  slaving  expedition  from  Fort  St. 
Joaquim,  on  the  Eio  Branco,  first  threatened  the 
devoted  mission.  The  influence  of  Schomburgk,  who 
was  then  in  those  parts,  was  in  some  measure  instiii- 
mental  in  averting  the  blow.  It  fell,  however,  on 
another  unfortunate  border  district,  from  the .  burnt 
and  pillaged  huts  of  which  forty  poor  Indians,  men, 
women,  and  children,  he  saw  being  led  into  sla- 
very. But  the  mission  was  also  doomed.  He  soon 
afterwards  witnessed  its  fate,  and  has  recorded  it 
in  terms  which  show  how  deeply  he  regretted  the 
calamity. 


62  THE  INDIAN  TBIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

Speaking  of  Mr.  Youd,  lie  says  :  "  The  Indians  soon 
<3ollected  around  liim,  and  evinced  tlie  greatest  desire 
to  be  instructed  in  the  Word  of  God,  and  our  lan- 
guage. I  have  seen  from  300  to  400  on  a  Sabbath, 
dressed  according  to  their  circumstances,  and  in  an 
orderly  manner,  assembled  within  a  rude  house  of 
prayer,  built  by  their  own  hands,  to  receive  instruc- 
tion in  the  Holy  Word  of  God. 

"  The  mission  was  not  established  many  months, 
when  the  Brazilian  Government  of  the  Upper  and 
Lower  Amazon  despatched  a  detachment  of  militia, 
and  took  possession  of  it,  under  the  plea  that  the 
village  belonged  to  the  Brazilian  territory.  The 
missionary  of  the  Church  of  England  was  accused 
of  having  alienated  the  Indians  from  the  Brazilian 
Government,  and  instructed  them  in  the  English 
language  and  religion,  and  received  an  injunction  to 
leave  the  village.  The  Indians,  fearing  lest  the  Bra- 
zilians might  conduct  them  into  slavery,  dispersed 
in  the  forest  and  in  the  mountains ;  and  the  work 
which  promised  such  favourable  results  was  destroyed. 

"  On  our  return  from  an  exploring  expedition  to 
Pirara,  in  May  1839,  we  found  it  occupied  by  a 
detachment  of  Brazilian  National  Guards,  under 
Seilhor  Pedro  Ayres. 

"  The  church  in  which  formerly  hymns  to  the  praise 
of  our  Lord  had  been  sung,  and  where  the  first  seeds 
of  Christianity  had  been  planted  among  the  benighted 
Indians,  was  now  converted  into  barracks,  and  become 
the  theatre  of  obscene  language  and  nightly  revels. 
The  missionary  removed  to  the  eastern  bank  of  the 


THE  ESSEQUIBO  AND  ITS  TRIBUTARIES.  Go 

Rupununi,  and  after  liis  departure  tlie  iiilial)itants  of 
Pirara  dispersed  and  wandered  about  the  wilderness. 
Too  many  desolate  places  are  now  to  he  seen  in  the 
savannahs,  which  were  once  the  site  of  villages,  and 
Avliich  have  met  with  a  similar  fate."  Such  is  the 
statement  of  Sir  R.   Schomburgk. 

Driven  from  Pirara,  ]\Ir.  Youd  commenced  another 
mission  at  Urwa  (or  Curua)  rapids,  which  are  un- 
<^uestionably  within  the  system  of  our  chief  river, 
the  Essequibo.  There  he  had  the  same  prospect  of 
success,  as  the  INIacusis  and  others  flocked  thither 
to  him,  though  strictly  forbidden  by  the  Brazilians  to 
do  so.  The  latter  resolved  to  break  up  this  second 
mission  also. 

A  priest,  who  had  visited  Pirara,  and  taken  note  of 
the  mission  there  in  its  flourishing  condition,  now  re- 
appeared. He  took  possession  of  the  house  of  Mr. 
Youd,  and  baptized  many  Indians,  afiixing  to  each  a 
cross  or  rosary.  The  missionary  of  the  Church  of 
England,  with  those  who  listened  to  his  instructions, 
also  received  a  cross — but  of  another  kind.  An  order, 
which  the  Brazilian  troops  were  at  hand  to  enforce, 
was  given  him  to  leave  his  second  station;  and  he 
was  compelled  to  do  so,  after  burying  there  his  poor 
wife,  whose  death  took  place  amidst  those  harassing 
trials. 

The  conduct  of  the  Brazilians  was  considered  un- 
justifiable, both  by  the  colonists  and  in  the  mother 
country.  But  the  missionary,  following  the  instruc- 
tions of  his  Society,  to  avoid  joolitical  complications, 
withdrew  half-way  down  the  Essequibo,  and  founded 


64  THE  INDIAN  TRIBEi^  OF  GUIANA. 

a  third  mission  at  Waraputa.^  This  situation,  how- 
ever, being  remote  from  the  Macusi  country,  was  less 
favourable  ;  and  though  ably  conducted,  first  by  him- 
self, and  afterwards  by  Mr.  Pollitt  his  successor,  it 
never  gave  promise  of  such  a  plentiful  harvest  as  the 
former,  and  was  finally  abandoned. 

I  saw  Mr.  Youd  on  his  arrival  at  Georgetown  after 
his  double  expulsion  from  Pirara  and  Urwa  rapids. 
He  was  accompanied  by  a  great  number  of  Indians, 
who,  leaving  their  country,  were  resolved  to  share  his 
fortunes,  and  paid  him  afi'ectionate  and  reverential 
obedience.  They  were  mostly  Macusis ;  but  some 
were  Caribs,  among  whom  was  Irai,  the  grandson  of 

^  It  would  liave  astonishecl  our  enterprising  but  unfortunate 
missionary  (and  most  of  the  colonists  at  that  period),  to  learn  that 
both  Waraputa,  where  he  had  taken  refuge  from  the  Brazilians, 
and  also  Bartica,  the  parent  mission,  were  on  territory  claimed  by 
the  Venezuelans,  though  its  only  occupants,  before  our  present 
settlers,  were  the  native  tribes  and  the  former  Dutch  colonists, 
whose  rights  were  ceded  to  us  ! 

In  the  great  map  of  Venezuela,  published  by  authority  at  Ca- 
racas, 1840,  the  western  bank  of  Essequibo  between  the  mouths  of 
Eupxmuni  and  Masaruni,  a  track  {following  the  river's  course)  of 
nearly  200  miles,  is  made  part  of  that  State ;  also  the  vast  region 
watered  by  the  Masaruni  and  Cuyuni,  save  a  few  miles  of  the 
northern  bank  of  the  latter,  which  include  the  spot  where  our 
penal  settlement  was  afterwards  founded. 

The  left  bank  of  Essequibo  heloiv  its  confluence  with  the  united 
Masaruni  and  Cuyuni  is,  in  the  same  map,  most  inconsistently  with 
the  above  claim,  given  to  our  province ;  also  the  sea-coast,  though 
only  to  Moruca  mouth  and  the  right  bank  of  that  stream. 

The  mural  precipices  of  Eoraima  separate  the  waters  which  flow 
towards  the  Orinoco  from  those  Avhich  descend  to  the  Essequibo  : 
and  that  wild  and  rugged  Indian  territory  is  the  boundary  placed 
by  nature  in  that  du-ection  between  om'  province  and  Venezuela. 


THE  ESSEQUIBO  AND  ITS  TRIBUTARIES.  05 

their  great  cliief  ]\Ialianarva.  That  young  man  was 
distinguished  from  the  others,  who  went  in  procession 
to  lay  their  wrongs  before  the  Governor,  l)y  a  large 
crescent  of  gold,  set  in  a  frame  of  polished  wood, 
which  he  Avorc  on  his  Ijreast. 

A  military  expedition  was  sent  from  Georgetown 
some  time  after,  Avliich  recovered,  and  for  a  time  held, 
Pirara.  We  are  most  thankful  that  no  blood  was 
shed  in  this  dispute,  which  had  then  become  national 
between  the  Empires  of  Great  Britain  and  Brazil. 
But  the  effect  of  this  second  military  occupation  was, 
as  may  be  conceived,  by  no  means  favourable  to  the 
spread  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ.  The  work,  overturned 
by  the  weapons  of  carnal  warfare  raised  by  the  enemy, 
could  not  be  restored  by  similar  means,  which  rather 
completed  its  destruction. 

Mr.  Youd  died  soon  after  on  his  passage  home.  He 
had  been  broken  in  health  and  spirits  by  his  many 
privations  and  trials,  and  suffering  much  from  the 
effects  of  poison,  thrice  administered,  it  is  said,  by  an 
old  heathen  Acawoio.  The  death  of  his  wife  previously 
at  Urwa  rapids  was  also  attributed  to  the  same  cause. 

The  English  missionaries  on  the  Essequibo  and  its 
tributaries  had  indeed  their  full  share  of  trials  and 
dangers.  On  one  occasion  Mr.  Youd's  canoe  was 
entered  by  one  of  those  snakes  which  attain  immense 
size  in  the  desert  tracts  of  the  interior.  Deserted  by 
his  terrified  Indians,  who,  after  vainly  striking  at  it 
with  their  paddles,  had  leaped  into  the  river,  he 
killed  it  with  a  cutlass  (the  first  blow  of  which  pro- 
videntially took  effect  on  the  neck  of  the  reptile),  and 

F 


66  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

tlms  saved  liis  oayii  life.  Its  skin  measured  thirty-one 
feet  in  leno-tb. 

His  successor,  Mr.  PoUitt,  liad  also  a  narrow  escape. 
His  canoe  was  capsized,  the  crew  having  attempted 
to  ascend  one  of  the  rapids  by  night,  while  he  was 
sleeping  ;  and  he  remained  in  great  j  eopardy,  clinging 
to  a  bush,  and  swayed  to  and  fro  by  the  current,  till 
the  Indians  had  recovered  the  canoe,  emptied  it  of 
water,  and  brought  it  up  to  him.  Fever  was  the 
result  of  this  accident,  and  it  compelled  his  return  to 
England. 

For  a  full  and  particular  account  of  the  missions 
which  then  existed  on  the  Essequibo,  see  the  interest- 
ing work  of  the  Eev.  J.  H.  Bernau  ;^  whose  then 
flourishing  post,  Bartica,  became  the  last  (as  it  had 
been  the  first)  station  on  it  supported  by  the  Church 
Missionary  Society. 

The  mission  to  Pirara  was  by  far  the  brightest  at- 
tempt yet  made  in  those  parts.  It  was  not  perhaps 
advisable  (judging,  as  is  so  easy,  afte7'  the  event)  to 
go  so  far  to  establish  a  mission.  Yet  the  ground  was 
quite  unoccupied  and  believed  to  be  ours,  as  the  sub- 
sequent interference  of  Government  fully  proved  : 
the  jealousy,  the  opposing  claim,  and  above  all  its 
enforcement  by  hayonets  Ijrought  against  a  peaceful 
mission,  could  not  have  been  foreseen ;  the  Indians 
received  their  teacher  with  joy,  and  the  prospect  of 
the  great  good  work  to  be  wrought  justified  the  at- 
tempt. The  effects  of  a  prosperous  mission, — civi- 
lizing as  well  as  evangelizing  the  people  of  those  for 
^  Missionary  Labours  in  British  Guiana,  1847. 


THE  ESSEQUIBO  AND  IT,"^  TBIBUTJIUES.  {]J 

distant  regions,  and  educating  tlicir  eliildreu, — would 
not  liavc  been  confined  to  the  Macusis  alone.  The 
AVord  in  a  few  months  had  aheady  spread  to  other 
tribes,  and  wouki  have  extended  itself  still  farther 
over  savannah  and  mountain,  while  in  the  other 
direction  its  influence  would  have  aided  that  of  the 
missions  near  the  coast. 

To  form  a  correct  idea  of  the  natural  difficulties  of 
this  undertaking,  it  must  be  considered  that  the  dis- 
tance traversed  from  Georgetown  to  Pirara  is  about 
300  miles  of  almost  uninhabited  country,  and  that 
the  course  of  the  Essequibo  is  interrupted  l)y  the 
dangerous  falls  and  rapids  of  Itaballi,  Waraputa,  and 
many  others;^  which,  with  the  strong  current  elsewhere, 

^  Those  falls  and  rajDids  have  not  only  prevented  the  Essequibo 
from  attaining  that  commercial  importance  which  its  great  size  and 
the  partial  communication  of  its  upper  tributaries  with  the  rivers 
of  BrazU  would  otherwise  have  given  it,  but  have  likewise  per- 
mitted only  a  few  travellers  to  behold  that  "  enchanting  scenery" 
which  made  the  soul  of  the  enthusiastic  Waterton  "  overflow  with 
joy,  and  roam  in  fancy  through  fairy-land." 

To  surmount  those  obstacles  to  navigation,  it  is  necessary  in  some 
places  to  carry  or  haul  the  canoe  or  boat  overland  at  the  side  of  the 
fall.  At  others,  advantage  is  taken  of  the  eddies  which  are  found  at 
the  base  of  the  huge  rocks  that  intercept  the  stream.  The  Indians 
pass  from  rock  to  rock  by  wading,  leaping,  or  swimming,  and  by 
means  of  a  hawser  haul  the  boat  through  the  rushing  water  from 
one  resting-point  to  another, — the  steersman,  keeping  his  seat  (and 
sometimes  lashed  to  it),  striving  with  his  large  paddle  to  guide  in 
some  degree  her  course.  The  roar  of  the  water  dasliiug  and  foam- 
ing amidst  the  surrounding  rocks  renders  this  operation  as  exciting 
as  it  is  difficult. 

Still  more  exciting  and  dangerous  is  the  task  of  descending  those 
rapids.  Tlie  safety  of  all  then  depends  on  their  perfect  steadiness, 
and  on  the  bowman  and  steersman  acting  in  concert  and  with 

F  2 


68  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

render  the  labour  of  ascending  it  very  great,  and  of 
several  weeks'  duration.  Taking  into  consideration 
these  and  other  obstacles  and  dangers,  and  the  com- 
plete isolation  of  such  a  j^ost,  we  may  form  a  just 
estimate  of  the  zeal  of  the  missionary  who  thought 
lightly  of  them  all  in  fulfilling  his  duty.  After  short 
but  severe  labour  he  went  to  his  rest ;  but  his  example 
remains  to  others  who  desire  to  fulfil  the  great  com- 
mand, "  Go  ye  and  teach  all  nations." 

instant  decision.  The  canoe  is  kept  in  the  very  centre  of  the 
current,  one  of  her  best  hands  kneeling,  ^Yith  quick  eye  and  ready 
paddle,  in  the  how,  and  the  rest  of  the  crew  exerting  their  strength 
to  give  her  head-way.  Darting  swiftly  along,  she  arrives  at  the 
edge  of  the  fall,  and  pointing  downward,  shoots  into  the  surf  below 
it,  dashing  it  up  on  either  side,  and  leaving  her  crew  alone  visible. 
If  all  be  well,  rising  above  the  foam  she  obeys  the  guiding  paddles 
in  stem  and  stern,  and  dances  over  the  tumbling  waves,  while  her 
excited  crew  with  a  triumphant  cry  exult  at  their  success. 

Not  always,  alas  !  is  this  the  case.  If  the  craft  be  too  heavily 
laden,  or  badly  managed  in  stem  or  stern,  the  risk  is  very  great. 
Whole  families,  even  of  Indians,  are  sometimes  drowned;  and 
the  lamentable  accident  by  which,  in  September  18G5,  Captain 
Beresford,  son-in-law  of  the  Governor,  and  four  other  gentlemen, 
with  two  of  their  crew,  lost  their  lives  in  shooting  the  lower  falls 
of  the  Masaruni,  will  long  be  painfully  remembered  in  the  province. 


CHAPTEE    V. 


THE    POMEROOK 


Indian  Territory — Its  Inhabitants — The  "Writer's  first  Eecei)tion 
by  and  Sojourn  among  them. 

While,  amidst  warlike  demonstrations  by  foe  and 
friend,  the  English  stations  among  the  Indian  tribes 
which  border  the  Upper  Essequibo  were  being  crushed, 
and  their  people  dispersed,  attention  Avas  being  drawn 
to  the  inhabitants  of  the  wild  region  of  forest  and 
swamp  which  stretches  beyond  that  river  towards  the 
mouth  of  the  Orinoco. 

Considerably  to  the  westward  of  the  cultivated 
2)art  of  the  colony  is  a  spot  which  is  marked  on 
most  maps  as  Cape  Nassau.  It  is  at  the  mouth  of 
the  river  Pomeroon,  on  its  eastern  bank.  Adjoining 
this  is  a  small  estuary  or  bay,  into  which  flows  the 
river  Moruca,  from  a  diff'erent  direction ;  which 
drains  a  large  tract  of  country  still  farther  to  the 
westward. 

The  Pomeroon,  or  Bouruma  (as  it  is  called  by  the 
Indians),  is  of  small  size  when  compared  with  some 
other  rivers  in  the  colony.  Its  source  is  in  the 
Sierra  Imataca,  which  is  a  ridge  stretching  from  the 


70  THi:  INDIAN  TEIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

Essequibo  to  tlie  Orinoco,  and  giving  rise  to  many 
large  streams. 

The  Dutch  formed  their  earliest  settlement,  which 
they  called  Nieuw  Zealand,  near  the  Pomeroon,  as 
early  as  1580  ;  and  in  the  course  of  the  follo^Ying 
century  erected  towns  on  its  banks,  and  on  those  of 
the  Moruca.  These  were  destroyed  by  the  French. 
The  only  remains  of  their  settlements  are  the  Imchs 
which  are  found  in  some  places  embedded  in  the 
earth. 

The  Indians  again  resumed  j^ossession  of  their 
lands,  and,  with  the  exception  of  a  very  few  settlers, 
are  their  sole  occupants  at  the  present  day.  In  that 
district  they  are  more  numerous  than  in  any  other. 

The  good  Bishop  Coleridge,  while  visiting  that 
river,  had  his  attention  called  by  the  Eev.  J.  H.  Duke 
to  the  number  and  condition  of  the  Indians  there. 
The  Society  for  the  Propagation  of  the  Gospel,  at  his 
recommendation,  resolved  to  send  out  forthwith  a  mis- 
sionary in  holy  orders,  with  a  young  lay  assistant,  to 
live  and  labour  among  them.  But  the  health  of  the 
former,  the  Rev.  C.  Carter,  gave  way  ere  he  reached 
the  river ;  and  I  had  to  proceed  thither  alone. 

About  forty-three  miles  from  the  sea,  the  Pomeroon 
receives  the  waters  of  its  largest  tributary,  the  Ara- 
paiaco.  On  the  banks  of  the  latter,  just  above  the  con- 
fluence, there  was  a  small  strip  of  cleared  land,  formerly 
inhabited  by  a  gang  of  negroes  employed  in  cutting- 
wood.  Those  negroes,  finding  the  rivers  I'ather  dull, 
had  taken  the  earliest  opportunity,  after  the  emanci- 
pation, of  quitting  them  for  the  society  of  their  gayer 


THE  POMEROON.  7 1 

bretlireu  on  the  coast.  But  there  were  still  remainiiio- 
ill  the  Legiiiiuiig  of  IS 40,  three  decaying  huts  which 
had  been  occupied  by  theiii. 

There  was  also  a  wooden  building,  which  had  been 
used  as  a  place  of  worship  on  those  rare  occasions  when 
they  were  visited  by  a  clergyman  or  itinerant  cate- 
cliist.     It  was,  when  I  first  saw  it,  in  a  "svi-etched  state ; 
the  thatched  roof  being  full  of  large  holes,  and  several 
of  the  window  shutters  having  fallen  off.     There  was 
free  access  to  the  wind  and  rain.     Not  having  been 
used  for  a  long  time,  it  was  almost  inaccessible  from 
the   lono'    orass  and  weeds  which   grew  all  round  in 
rank  luxmiance.     The  frame  of  the  building  was,  how- 
ever, soimd,  though  the  boarded  sides  and  floor  were 
much  decayed.     This  was  to  serve  as  a  mission  chapeL 
One  of  the  three  huts  before  mentioned  was  occupied 
by  an  old  white  sail-maker,  who  was  sick  with  ague 
and   fever,  and  soon  after  left  the  place.     The  next 
was  the  dwellino;  of  a  kind  old  iiei'TO  woman,  named 
Jeannette,  who   had  several   black  children  residino- 
with  her.     The  third,  being  decayed  and  abandoned, 
was  at  my  service.     It  was  a  smgular  and  not  very 
inviting  residence  :  the  front  was  boarded  and  covered 
with  shingles  (or  wooden  tiles);  the  two  ends  were  of 
shingles  nailed  upon  laths,  and  the  back  Avas  composed 
of  the  split  trunks  of  the  manicole  palms,  covered  on 
the  outside  with  the  leaves  of  the  trooly.     The  roof 
was  also  thatched,  but  the  thatch  was  full  of  holes. 
It  was  divided  by  partitions  of  rough  Ijoards  into  three 
apartments,  two  of  which  had  boarded  floors  resting 
on  the  earth,  and  very  much  decayed  ;  and  the  third 


72  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GVIANA. 

had  apparently  been  used  for  some  light  kinds  of 
blacksmith's  work,  a  block  of  very  tough  wood,  which 
had  been  the  anvil,  standing  firmly  fixed  in  the 
earthen  fioor.  The  situation  of  the  building  l^eing  low, 
the  water  appeared  between  the  chinks  of  the  old  floor 
when  the  river  was  swollen  by  the  spring  tides,  and  a 
number  of  small  frogs  were  accustomed  to  come  out 
in  wet  weather,  and  spring  upon  the  walls  ;  one  part 
of  which,  being  very  damp  and  green,  seemed  to  pos- 
sess particular  attractions  for  them.  The  roof  was 
open,  and  flakes  of  mingled  soot  and  cobwebs,  which 
had  been  long  collecting  there,  were  continually  falling, 
as  the  insects  which  abounded  disturbed  and  shook 
them  down.  There  was  also  a  large  nest  of  destruc- 
tive wood-ants,  which  were  devouring  the  building. 
These  forthwith  contrived  to  get  into  my  clothes-chest, 
and  seriously  damage  its  contents.  A  dose  of  arsenic 
was  put  into  their  nest,  and  in  a  day  or  two  all  were 
dead  or  f^one.  The  next  task  Avas  to  whitewash  the 
filthy  walls,  which  abounded  with  vermin. 

Spiders  of  all  sorts  and  sizes, —  numerous  fine  speci- 
mens of  the  great  South  American  cockroach, — and 
oftentimes  the  white  scorpion  or  huge  bush-centipede, 
would  make  their  appearance  from  holes  and  corners. 
Pallid-looking  unclean  lizards,  as  the  wood-slaves, — 
some  with  monstrous  bulbous  tails,  others  which  had 
lost  theirs  by  the  fortune  of  reptile  war, — would  crawl 
along  the  beams  and  sooty  rafters ;  and  sometimes, 
falling  flat  down,  lie  staring  in  apparent  astonishment, 
clinging  tightly  with  broad  adhesive  toes  to  whatever 
they  chanced  to  alight  on.    More  graceful  and  welcome 


THE  POMEBOON.  73 

visitors  were  tlie  olive-green  lizards,  witli  mottled  coats 
that  shone  like  hurnished  copper.  These  were  useful 
allies,  devouring  the  insects.  One  little  fellow  became 
in  time  very  tame  and  friendly,  and  would  allow  me 
to  touch  him. 

In  this  wild  place  it  would  have  hccn  impossible  for 
me  to  have  resided  but  for  the  old  woman's  aid.  She 
immediately  saluted  me  as  master,  and  placed  her 
household  at  my  disposal.  A  strange-looking  black 
boy,  with  a  defect  in  one  eye,  and  a  small  scrap  of 
l)lue  rag  as  a  garment,  was,  she  said,  to  be  my  "  butler." 
I  got  that  youth  to  sling  his  hammock  with  me  in  my 
new  abode,  not  thinking  it  quite  safe  to  sleep  there 
alone.  The  first  night  we  M-ere  disturbed  l)y  some 
creature  getting  in  at  a  hole  in  the  roof,  which  my 
<^ompanion  said  was  a  tiger-cat.  I  Avas  more  appre- 
licnsive  of  snakes,  which  abounded  there  ;  but  we  had 
no  opportunity  of  ascertaining  the  nature  of  our  un- 
welcome "Visitor,  as  it  was  perfectly  dark  ;  and,  being 
alarmed  at  the  noise  we  made,  it  quickly  scrambled 
<:»at  again,  and  returned  no  more. 

Having  no  furniture,  it  became  necessary  to  borrow 
some  for  present  use.  This  was  difticult.  However, 
a  table  with  thi'cc  legs  was  procured,  and  the  place  of 
a  fourth  supplied  with  a  stick  from  a  neighbouring 
tree.  It  was,  after  all,  so  rickety  that  it  could  only 
stand  against  the  wall.  A  small  chair  was  also  ob- 
tained, the  seat  of  which  being  lower  in  front  than 
Ix'hind,  the  i)erson  sitting  in  it  had  a  tendency  to  slip 
otf.  It  was  (juite  a  curiosity  in  its  way,  and  why  it 
was  made  so  it  was  difficult    to  conceive.     A  small 


74  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

bench  or  form  supplied  a  more  couvenient  seat.  In 
other  respects  we  managed  somewhat  better,  being 
suppHed  from  a  wood-cutting  establishment,  where 
there  was  a  small  store,  or  shop,  from  whence  rice, 
plantains,  salt  fish,  and  pork  might  be  procured,  almost 
the  only  food  obtainable  for  several  months.  This, 
with  the  damp  situation,  was  very  injmious  to  health, 
thouoh  other  inconveniences  were  triflino;  and  it  was 
impossible  to  refrain  from  smiling  at  the  grotesque 
appearance  of  the  dwelling  and  its  contents. 

The  rivers  being  in  front,  and  a  swampy  forest  be- 
hind us,  we  were  obliged  to  go  by  water  whenever  we 
wished  to  leave  the  place,  and  a  canoe  was  kindly  lent 
me  for  two  or  three  months,  till  an  opportunity  pre- 
sented itself  of  purchasing  one. 

A  school  was  soon  after  commenced  with  two  or 
tliree  black  and  coloured  children  living  in  the  neigh- 
bom4iood,  whom  it  was  difficult  at  first  to  manage  : 
their  parents  being  accustomed  to  use  the  lash  un- 
sparingly, with  other  severe  punishments,  hardening 
to  the  children  and  painful  to  witness.  One  girl  had 
her  hands  blistered  for  a  trifling  theft.  Her  mother 
roasted  a  lime  (a  small  kind  of  lemon),  and  forced 
her  to  grasp  it  in  her  hands,  which  she  held  tightly 
compressed  within  her  own,  till  the  palms  were  severely 
burnt.  On  another  occasion  I  found  on  the  opposite 
bank  of  the  river  three  women  chastising  a  girl.  They 
had  stripped  ber,  and  two  held  her  extended  by  the 
hands  and  feet  Avhile  the  third  flogged  her  with  a 
long  switch.  In  remitting  further  punishment  they 
always  said :    "Ah,  sir,    you  do  not  yet  know !     If 


THE  roMEnnoX.  75 

youug   Creoles  arc  not  well    Hogged,  tliey    iievn-  do 
oood." 

There  were  uo  such  scenes  on  the  spot  A\'heri'  1 
li^'ed,  though  old  Jeannette  frequently  administered 
chastisement  to  her  young  creoles  all  round  mth  a 
large  strap.  On  these  occasions,  there  was  terrific 
outcry  with  very  little  pain,  most  of  the  strokes 
being  received  on  tlieii'  loose  though  scanty  garments, 
or  dexterously  avoided  h}'  gohlin-likc  capers  and  con- 
tortions of  body.  The  culprits  had  to  hold  each 
other  in  turn,  an  office  which  they  eagerly  performed, 
and  which  seemed  to  afibrd  them  much  consolation. 

The  youngest  boy  of  her  establishment  was  always 
in  trouble.  He  was  a  " dirt-eater"  with  a  heavy  look 
and  swollen  body.  He  would  lie  on  his  face,  mth 
the  grass  uprooted  beside  him,  eating  earth  to  satisfj' 
his  unnatural  craving.  Loud  howls,  and  piercing 
cries  of  "xVh,  poor  me!"  resounding  through  the 
forest  and  over  the  river,  proclaimed  from  time  to 
time  that  the  wretched  boy  had  been  again  caught 
while  indidging  his  depraved  appetite,  and  was  thoi 
suffering  the  penalty  which  Jeannette,  with  rigid  con- 
scientiousness, inflicted. 

These  things,  and  others  of  similar  nature,  A\'ere  b} 
no  means  attractive  to  the  Indians  passing  in  their 
canoes ;  nor  likely  to  induce  them  to  place  their 
childi'cn  there. 

Some  Waraus,  employed  in  cutting  the  leaves  of 
the  trooly  palm,  became  the  next  objects  of  attention. 
In  order  to  visit  them  it  was  necessary  for  me  to 
paddle  myself  to  their  sleeping-place   every  evening, 


76  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

assisted  by  my  negro  boy.  They  were  very  wild  in 
tlieir  appearance  and  manners,  and  it  was  impossible 
to  look  on  their  degraded  condition,  especially  that 
of  the  females,  without  an  earnest  prayer  that  they 
might  soon  be  led  to  sit  clothed  at  the  feet  of  the 
Lord  Jesus.  An  elderly  man  named  Manwaiko  was 
their  capitan,  or  chief.  He  was  as  ignorant  of  our 
language  as  any  of  his  people.  I  endeavoured  to 
enter  into  conversation  with  him,  but  he  invariably 
answered  in  the  jargon  of  the  rivers,  "Me  no  sabby" 
(J  do  not  understand).  When  he  spoke  to  me,  I  was 
equally  at  a  loss  to  comprehend  his  meaning,  his 
knowledge  of  English  being  confined  to  a  very  few 
words,  which  he  pronounced  indistinctly,  and  as 
though  labouring  under  a  severe  and  perpetual  cold. 

Hoping  to  get  on  by  degrees,  I  asked  him  the 
names  of  diftcrent  objects  in  his  language,  and  wrote 
them  dowTi  to  commit  to  memory.  This  at  once 
interested  him ;  and  it  is  indeed  a  passport  to  the 
favour  of  every  Indian  to  express  an  interest  in  his 
language.  We  were  soon  on  frieudly  terms,  and  his 
people,  as  Avell  as  himself,  began  to  look  for  my 
arrival  every  evening  after  they  had  done  work. 
They  could  not,  however,  be  induced  to  visit  me. 

One  Sunday,  a  coloured  wood-cutter  brought  five 
Waraus  of  his  gang  to  attend  Divine  service.  To 
give  them  a  more  decent  appearance,  he  had  dressed 
them  all  in  red  woollen  shirts.  To  these  they  had 
added,  from  the  suggestions  of  their  native  taste, 
very  tall  sharp-pomted  caps,  a  natural  production, 
the  spathe  of  the  trooly  palm.      Their  appearance,  as 


THE  pomj:i:(k>x.  77 

tlicy  entered  our  liumhle  place  of  worship  in  riuliim 
file,  Avitli  those  extriiordinaiy  caps  and  long  scarltl 
shirts,  was  strangely  comical.  They  seemed  at  lirst 
painfully  conscious  of  unusual  finery,  and  nervously 
apprehensive  of  the  su})ernatiiral  consequences  oi 
attending  Christian  worship.  But  those  feelings  were 
lost  in  mii'th,  when  one  of  them,  in  trying  to  kneel, 
involuntarily  squatted  on  his  heels  (as  an  Indian 
at  first  invariably  does),  lost  his  balance,  and  nearly 
overturned  his  companions.  Loud  exclamations  of 
delio-ht  and  a   hurst  of  Warau    nuTriment  followed. 

o 

Theii*  behaviour  after  this  was  so  irreverent  tliat  it 
was  a  relief  w^hen  they  went  out.  Such  incidents, 
though  painfully  annoying,  must  be  expected  at  first 
among  barbarous  and  heathen  people. 

Manwaiko  had  two  wives,  and  each  of  these  had  a 
family  of  young  children.  His  eldest  daughter  was 
a  giii  of  about  ten  years  of  age,  and  a  line  young- 
man  of  the  party  was  pointed  out  to  me  as  her  hus- 
band ;  the  Indian  gii-ls  being  betrothed  at  a  very 
early  age.  Between  the  two  wives  and  thcii*  re- 
spective children  little  kindness  seemed  to  exist. 
One  evening,  Avhile  the  t>arty  were  squatting  on 
the  ground,  eating  their  supper,  which  consisted 
of  salt  fish  and  pounded  plantains,  called  "foo-foo," 
being  the  rations  provided  Ijy  their  employer,  one  of 
the  wives,  who  Avith  her  children  had  been  emj^loycd 
in  cutting  fij-ewood,  discovered,  on  her  return,  that 
the  supper  for  herself  and  family  was  not  to  be  found, 
having  been  carried  off  by  some  animal  througli  tlie 
neglect  or  connivance  of  her  rival.     It  could  hardly 


78  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

be  expected  tliat  slie  would  sit  down  quietly  without 
tlie  evening  meal  for  her  children,  even  if  disposed 
to  submit  as  regarded  herself;  and  she  accordingly 
applied  to  Manwaiko  for  a  share  of  his  allowance, 
which  was  ample.  He  treated  her  request  with  con- 
tempt, and  hardly  vouchsafed  her  a  denial.  She  then 
commenced  a  furious  torrent  of  abuse ;  during  which 
he  finished  his  meal  with  great  composure;  until, 
being  irritated  at  his  indifference,  she  at  last  told 
him  that  he  Avas  no  "  capitan,"  no  father,  and  no 
man.  He  was  rather  roused  by  this  last  remark,  and 
in  a  stern  hoarse  voice  said  something  which  silenced 
her.  Finding  it  was  impossible  to  do  any  good,  I 
left  them. 

Such  stormy  ebullitions  of  temper  are  rare  in  the 
Indian  families,  though,  where  polygamy  is  practised, 
continual  variance  and  ill-feeling  are  found. 

There  were  at  that  time  no  Warau  settlements  on 
the  Pomeroon.  I  did  not  know  this  at  first ;  but, 
seeing  that  there  were  many  of  that  tribe  employed 
near  me,  thought  that  their  dwellings  were  not  far  off. 
However,  that  party  lived  more  than  one  hundred 
and  fifty  miles  away,  and  were  brought  from  that 
distance,  as  their  work  was  cheaper  and  more  pro- 
fitable than  that  of  the  tribes  inhabiting  the  river. 
In  a  few  Aveeks  they  departed. 

These  efforts  with  the  Waraus  having  proved  in- 
effectual, as  far  as  human  eye  could  see, — the  only 
good  result  being  the  acquisition  of  a  very  small 
vocabulary  of  their  language,  which  proved  useful 
in   after  times, — I   found   that  the    sole  prosj^ect   of 


THE  ro^rEI:o^)x.  79 

(.'stablisliing  a  mission  was  among  \\\c  people  of  tlir 
Jistrict.  We  were  in  the  conn  try  of  the  Arawaks, 
and  I  liad  already  had  frequent  interviews  with  them 
in  their  eanoes  on  the  river. 

The  external  appearance  of  the  Ara^\alvs  is  vriy 
superior  to  that  of  the  Waraus ; — not  lliat  tluy  are 
superior  in  size  and  strength,  hut  the}'  have  a  luorc 
civilized  appearance  and  manner,  and  greater  cleanli- 
ness of  person.  The  women  seldom  appeared  on  the 
river  without  putting  on  the  'Hvimisa ;"  and  their 
hair,  which  is  thick  and  long,  was  generally  neatly 
braided,  and,  in  some  instances,  secured  hy  orna- 
ments of  silver  at  the  l)ack  of  the  head.  ]\[ost  of 
them  were  less  squalid  in  figure,  and  possessed  finer 
and  more  intelligent  features,  than  the  females  of  the 
other  tribes. 

Many  of  the  younger  men  knew  something  of  the 
broken  English  spoken  on  the  river  ;  and  with  them 
I  was  able  to  converse,  though  with  difliculty.  The 
older  men  used  only  the  Creole-Dutch  in  their  inter- 
course with  the  settlers,  and  with  this  I  was  unac- 
quamted.  The  females  spoke  nothing  but  theii-  own 
beautiful  language  ;  although  some  individuals  knew 
enough  of  ours  to  comprehend  the  meaning  of  a  few 
sentences  expressed  in  the  simplest  form. 

I  frequently  fell  in  with  them  on  the  river.  They 
possessed  a  natural  courtesy,  which  kept  them  from 
reviling  or  insult ;  but  it  was  very  evident  that  they 
looked  on  me  as  a  troublesome  person. 

They  never  would  visit  my  abode,  though  often 
invited   to    do    so ;    and    when    they    called    at    the 


80  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

cottage  of  the  old  negro  woman,  they  took  tlieir 
leave  when  they  perceived  me  approaching  to  speak 
to  them.  By  commencing  a  school  for  the  five  or 
six  black  and  mulatto  children  in  the  neighbourhood, 
I  had  hoped  to  attract  the  Indians  also ;  but  the 
antipathy  of  race  rendered  it  anything  but  an  attrac- 
tion to  them.  One  Indian  alone  promised  to  send 
me  his  son,  and  he  broke  his  word. 

To  push  off  in  my  canoe,  and  speak  to  them  as 
they  were  passing,  was  soon  the  only  means  of  inter- 
course left ;  and  it  was  mortifying  to  see  them  paddle 
quickly  by  with  as  little  noise  as  possible,  keeping 
close  to  the  bush  on  the  ojDposite  side  to  escape  obser- 
vation. One  man,  more  plain  in  his  speech  than  the 
rest,  expressed  the  sentiment  of  his  tribe  (and,  I  may 
add,  of  the  Indians  generally)  in  words  to  the  follow- 
ing effect  : — "  My  father  knew  not  your  book,  and 
my  grandfather  knew  not  your  book  ; — they  were 
wiser  than  we  ; — we  do  not  Avisli  to  learn  anything 
which  they  did  not  know." 

The  chief  cause  of  their  unwillingness  arose  from 
the  fact,  which  I  afterwards  discovered,  that  their 
"  semicici"  or  sorcerers,  foreseeing  in  the  reception  of 
Christianitv  the  loss  of  their  gains  and  influence,  had 
forbidden  the  people  to  hold  any  intercourse  with  me. 
Sickness  and  death  were  denounced  against  any  who 
should  do  so. 

Being  thus  taught  to  shun  the  place,  no  game 
could  be  purchased  from  them,  and  fresh  meat  was 
consequently  seldom  seen  among  us  during  that 
period.     To  satisfy  the  natural  craving,  many  hours 


THE  POMEROON.  8  1 

were  spent  in  the  little  canoe  with  the  bhick  boy, 
angling  for  small  fish  among  the  moeo-moco  and 
other  plants  which  fringed  the  banks  of  thu  ri\er. 
"We  had,  I  remember,  better  fortune  with  the  rude 
hooks  he  made  out  of  common  pins  than  with  those 
of  English  manufacture ;  but,  not  being  a  "  complete 
angler,"  I  was  not  very  successful  with  either.  Still 
we  managed  now  and  then,  chiefly  by  his  skill,  to 
get  a  dish  of  "congo  boys,"  or  other  small  fish,  for 
dinner,  and  generally  caught  enough  to  fiavoui*  the 
negro  soup,  our  standing  dish.  After  a  time  a  goat 
was  purchased,  the  milk  of  which  was  a  great 
luxury. 

A  settler  had  been  engaged  to  erect  a  mission 
cottage  eight  months  before.  He  had  fixed  the  posts 
in  the  ground,  put  on  the  thatched  roof,  and  departed, 
taking  no  further  steps  to  finish  it.  The  low  swampy 
ground  was  flooded  by  the  heavy  rains,  and  at  high 
spring-tides  the  river  overflowed  it.  One  morning 
our  canoe  ^^'as  missed,  and  after  a  time  found  in  the 
forest  behind  us,  whither  it  had  floated  during  the 
night. 

But  those  discomforts  were  very  trifling  things 
compared  Avith  the  apparently  hopeless  prospect 
among  the  people  around.  It  was  A\Tong  to  despond, 
thouo;h  difficult  at  times  to  avoid  it.  "  Men  ouirlit 
always  to  pray,  and  not  to  faint/' 

Jeannette,  the  old  mistress  of  the  place,  could  do 
but  little  to  aid  in  that  respect.  But  in  others  her 
kindness  and  support  were  invaluable.  When  the 
sickness   (inevitable   in   that   marshy   spot)    came   at 

r. 


82  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

last,  and  she  found  me  on  the  floor  of  my  hut  in  a 
raging  fever,  her  attention  was  unremitting,  though 
her  practice  of  physic  was  unfortunate.  For  being 
unable  to  weigh  medicine,  and  in  much  fear  lest 
"Master  William,"  as  she  called  me,  should  die  of 
yellow  fever,  like  many  young  whites  she  had  known, 
she  administered  most  violent  remedies  at  random, 
and  nearly  brought  on  the  issue  she  sought  to 
avoid. 

But  though  no  doctor,  the  old  African  was  a  kind 
and  attentive  nurse.  She  sometimes  beguiled  the 
weary  hours  by  tales  of  her  past  life.  Many  a  story 
had  she  to  relate,  how,  when  a  young  girl,  betrayed 
by  a  female  companion,  she  had  been  kidnapped  by 
two  negro  men  on  the  banks  of  the  Gambia,  and 
feared  that  the  food  given  by  the  whites  who  bought 
her  was  only  to  fatten  her  for  their  eating  : — how 
she  had  escaped  the  horrors  of  the  hold  of  the  slave- 
ship,  by  becoming  the  favourite  of  its  captain,  and 
the  inmate  of  his  cabin : — and  what  she  had  since 
witnessed  and  experienced.  AVith  all  its  evils,  she 
very  strangely,  as  I  thought,  preferred  the  past  state 
of  things,  fearing  destitution  in  old  age.  Her 
stories,  though  not  always  of  the  most  cheerful 
nature,  were  a  diversion  from  the  listless  watching 
of  the  tide  ebbing  and  flowing  past  the  open  door ; 
or  listening  to  the  parrots  flying  high  over  head  in 
pairs  to  their  nests,  and  telling  by  their  cries  that 
another  weary  day  was  drawing  to  its  close. 

An  accident  soon  after  occurred,  the  consequences 
of  which,  had  they  been  fcital,  would  have  increased 


THE  rOMEEOON.  83 

the  superstitious  fears  of  the  natives,  and  coufirmed 
the  predictions  of  their  sorcerers. 

Three  coloured  childi-en  were  preparing  to  cross 
the  river  from  school  to  theii'  home  one  evening,  in 
a  small  canoe,  when  it  unfortunately  swung  round  with 
a  puff  of  wind,  and  a  little  boy,  who  was  standing 
and  gaily  flourishing  his  paddle  in  the  sharp-pointed 
stern,  toppled  over  into  the  river,  and  was  carried 
down  by  the  deep  and  rapid  current.  He  went  under 
twice  amidst  the  screams  of  his  sisters.  On  the  bank, 
a  little  louder  down,  was  an  old  tree,  one  long  branch 
of  which  swept  the  stream.  By  grasping  the  extre- 
mity of  this  with  one  hand,  and  swinging  out  into 
the  water,  I  was  enabled  to  lay  hold  of  him  as  his 
head  came  again  to  the  surface.  The  branch  holdincr 
firm,  by  God's  mercy  his  life  was  saved. 

The  hope  of  eventual  success  among  the  Indians 
was  revived  by  the  following  incident : — 

One  day,  about  noon,  T  was  surprised  by  a  visit 
from  an  Araw4k,  who  was  accompanied  by  his  son, 
a  boy  of  about  five  years  of  age,  and  was  still  more 
surprised  when,  after  a  friendly  salutation  on  his 
part,  he  asked  me  if  I  would  instruct  his  child.  I 
had  never  seen  the  man  before,  and  had  become  so 
accustomed  to  indifference  and  rejection,  that  I  could 
hardly  believe  him  serious  in  his  request.  He  was, 
however,  perfectly  in  earnest,  and  said  that  he  had 
just  returned  to  his  "place"  after  a  long  absence, 
and  had  now  come  to  see  me  as  soon  as  he  heard  of 
my  arrival  among  his  people.  He  was  not  well 
acquainted  wdth  English,  but  we  managed  to  under- 

G  2 


84  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

stand  each  otlier  s  meaning,  helping  out  the  words 
by  signs  and  gestures  ;  and  an  hour  or  two  passed 
away  more  pleasantly  than  any  I  had  experienced 
for  a  long  time.  He  had  been  to  the  mouth  of  the 
Essequibo,  and  had  seen  what  was  doing  there. 

He  seemed  to  have  his  eyes  oj^en  to  the  state  of  the 
Indians,  as  living  "  without  God  in  the  world,"  and 
expressed  disgust  at  the  superstition  of  liis  coimtry- 
men  in  servino;  devils.  Some  time  afterwards  I  found 
out  that  he  had  been  himself  a  sorcerer,  but,  forsaking 
the  practice,  had  broken  his  magical  gourd,  and  cast 
away  the  fragments,  when  placing  himself  under 
instruction. 

He  had  been  a  great  traveller  for  one  of  his  tribe, 
having  been  a  long  way  up  the  Essec[uibo,  and  he 
was  also  Avell  acquainted  with  the  lower  part  of  the 
Orinoco.  Though  not  then  a  recognised  chief,  he  was 
the  principal  man  at  his  settlement,  and  possessed  of 
extensive  family  influence  among  his  people.  He  was 
small  in  stature,  but  had  keen  eyes,  and  his  black 
hair  was  slightly  curled :  from  this  he  had  derived 
his  Indian  name,  which  he  told  me  was  "  Saci-barra"  ^ 
{good  or  heautiful  hair). 

I  found  that  he  fully  believed  in  the  existence  and 
coocbiess  of  God,  and  desii^ed  to  serve  Him,  but  he 
listened  with  surprise  and  wonder  to  the  account  I 
gave  him  of  the  life  and  work  of  the  Kedeemer. 
He  Avas,  however,  firmly  convinced  of  the  impossi- 
l)ility  of  knowing  the  way  to  ''  Ifilici  Wa'cinaci,"  the 

^  In  AraAvilk  tlic  termination  ci  is  pi-onounced  as  che  in  "  cheer." 


THE  rOMEEOOX.  35 

"  Great  Our  Father,"  without  revelation  from  (Jod 
Himself,  and  promised  to  come  every  Satm:day,  and 
stay  till  ^londay  morning,  that  he  might  see  his 
child,  and  himself  receive  instruction. 

I  would  willingly  have  kept  the  boy  with  me,  but 
he  said  he  was  not  prepared  as  yet  to  leave  him, 
and  seemed  hurt  at  the  distrust  implied.  He  said  that 
his  words  were  true,  and  I  had,  a  day  or  two  after, 
proof  that  they  were  so,  by  his  bringing  not  only  the 
boy,  but  his  eldest  daughter,  a  girl  eight  years  of 
age,  whom  he  placed  with  me,  assming  me  that 
all  his  childi-en  should  be  brought  as  soon  as  they 
were  old  cnouoh. 

O 

After  some  further  conversation  he  returned  to  his 
canoe,  went  home,  and  induced  his  wife  to  come  with 
him  on  the  following  Sunday ;  and  the  next  week  a 
company,  consisting  of  the  foiu*  sisters  of  his  "wife, 
with  the  husbands  of  three  of  them,  two  other 
persons,  and  the  children  of  all,  filled  my  little  hut. 
Two  of  the  party  left  theii'  children  with  me. 

Saci-barra,  or  CorneHus  (by  which  name  he  was 
baptized  in  the  course  of  the  next  year),  was  regular 
in  sup})lying  his  childi-en  with  food,  as  were  also  the 
others.  They  frequently  brought  me  presents  of  game 
after  a  successful  hunt,  in  token  of  gratitude. 

Such  was  the  commencement  of  the  work  in  the 
Pomeroon.  A  suigle  Indian,  whom  I  had  never  seen, 
was  induced,  by  his  secret  convictions,  to  come  for- 
ward in  defiance  of  the  sorcerers  of  his  tribe,  and 
break,  by  his  example,  the  spell  which  seemed  to 
have  been  cast  over  his  countrymen. 


86  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

The  father  of  the  women  before  mentioned  soon 
after  joined  us.  My  little  hut  would  by  no  means 
hold  all,  so  they  suspended  their  hammocks  beneath 
the  roof  of  the  future  mission  dwelling.  Matters 
being  in  this  encouraging  state,  I  felt  anxious  to 
extend  the  sphere  of  labour,  but  resolved  to  wait 
a  short  time  and  feel  the  way  before  making  any 
fresh  attempt.  The  people  with  me,  though  well  dis- 
posed, required  much  instruction,  and  from  them  and 
others  I  heard  much  of  the  denunciations  of  their 
sorcerers. 

The  following  incident,  however,  led  me  to  com- 
mence at  once  with  other  families  of  their  tribe. 
While  engaged  one  afternoon  in  teaching  the  little 
school,  a  violent  thunderstorm  came  on,  which  com- 
pelled an  Arawak,  with  his  wife  and  children,  to 
bring  their  canoe  to  land  for  the  purpose  of  seeking 
shelter.  I  saw  them  looking  at  our  hut,  which  they 
never  before  would  visit,  and  asked  them  to  enter 
till  the  storm  abated.  As  the  rain  was  falling  in 
torrents  they  did  so,  and  the  man  seemed  amazed  at 
the  sight  of  the  Indian  children  learning  their  alphabet. 
After  inquiring  about  his  own  children,  to  whom  he 
seemed  much  attached,  I  pressed  him  to  learn  things 
good  and  profitable  for  this  life  and  the  life  eternal, 
or  at  least  to  allow  them  to  do  so.  He  was  moved, 
but  would  not  yield,  and  seemed  indignant  that 
others  should  have  dared  to  attend  instruction  with- 
out the  consent  of  their  tribe,  and  said  that  before 
anything  of  the  kind  were  done,  the  "  capitan  "  should 
have  made  all  of  them  acquainted  with  it.    To  remo^'^e 


THE  POMEROON,  y7 

this  objection,  I  asked  him  if  lie  and  his  family  would 
consider  these  things  well,  if  laid  before  him  by  the 
mouth  of  the  chief?  He  answered  that  he  would, 
and  went  his  way,  the  storm  having  ceased. 

Accordingly  I  soon  after  visited  the  settlement  oj" 
their  chief.  Our  little  canoe  had  an  unusual  number 
of  paddlers,  there  being  myself,  a  black  boy  and  girl, 
one  of  our  Indian  men,  and  his  wife,  Avho  wished  to 
accompany  iis.  The  chief  we  Avent  to  see  had  no 
more  clothing,  when  we  first  met  him,  than  the 
meanest  individual  of  his  tribe  :  but  after  returnino: 
om'  salutation,  he  soon  put  on  one  or  two  garments, 
and  assuming  dignity  with  his  apparel,  entered  into 
a  long  conversation.  I  found  him  better  acquainted 
mth  English  than  any  individual  of  his  nation  whom 
I  had  previously  met  with. 

His  Indian  name  he  told  me  was  "  Waramaraka," 
which  is  derived  from  the  name  of  the  ornamented 
gourd  or  rattle  used  by  their  sorcerers.  He  was,  how- 
ever, kno"\;\Ti  to  the  settlers  by  the  name  of  John 
"WiUiam.  He  was  shrewd  and  intelligent;  but  both 
himself  and  his  people  were  much  contaminated  by 
intercourse  with  civilized  but  unprincipled  persons, 
and  very  diflferent  from  the  simple-minded  family 
who  had  joined  me.  They  all  attended,  however, 
with  outward  reverence  at  our  worship  that  night 
in  the  forest. 

The  next  morning  we  again  had  family  prayci*s  ; 
after  which  he  presented  to  me  two  fine  lads,  each 
about  thirteen  years  of  age,  and  desired  me  to  teach 
them.     He  then  took  his  gun,  and  the  youths  pro- 


88  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

vided  themselves  with  hammocks,  paddles,  and  their 
bows  and  arrows ;  and  we  all  proceeded  to  visit  the 
people  at  other  settlements  who  acknowledged  him 
as  their  head.  I  found  myself  regarded  with  great 
curiosity  at  the  first  place  we  came  to  :  and  after  an 
interview  of  about  an  hour,  during  which  we  were 
regaled  with  crabs  and  cassava  bread,  and  my  com- 
panion was  served  with  paiwari  (the  intoxicating 
drink  made  by  the  Indians),  the  mother  of  the 
family  called  her  son  Ifili,  a  handsome  youth  of  about 
eleven,  and  put  on  him  a  white  shii't.  The  father 
then  delivered  him  over  to  me,  together  with  his 
sister,  a  little  girl  about  seven  years  of  age.  Both 
parents  promised  to  visit  me  on  the  Sabbath.  We 
again  embarked,  our  small  craft  being  hardly  able 
to  contain  us  all. 

The  settlements  we  had  visited  were  on  the  Tapa- 
cuma,  but  we  now  re-entered  the  Ara^Daiaco  ;  and, 
having  landed,  proceeded  through  the  forest,  follow- 
ing each  other  in  Indian  file  along  the  narrow  j^ath, 
to  three  other  Indian  "  places."  AVe  were  received 
with  great  hospitality  at  each,  and  again  feasted 
with  crabs  and  cassava  bread.  The  crabs  were  of  a 
purple  colour,  and  I  at  first  wondered  at  finding  them 
so  far  inland,  but  afterwards  learned  that  the  Indians 
go  in  their  canoes  to  the  sea,  at  certain  seasons ;  and, 
having  first  plastered  their  naked  bodies  with  mud 
and  clay  to  keep  off  the  mosquitoes,  which  are  beyond 
measure  annoying,  they  catch  the  crabs,  and  put  them 
into  quakes,  or  small  baskets,  with  which  they  load 
their  canoes,  and  return  home  to  feast  on  them   for 


THE  POMEROON.  89 

several  days.  Tlicy  are  immoderately  fond  of  them. 
Having  already  partaken  of  crabs  as  much  as  I  wished, 
I  was  about  to  decline  taking  any  more  :  but  my 
companion  checked  me,  and  said  that  I  should  give 
offence  if  I  did  not  accept  of  all  the  food  offered  to 
nic.  "  It  is  our  fashion,"  said  he ;  "  if  you  are  not 
able  to  eat  it,  you  must  cany  it  away  with  you."  He 
conducted  himself  with  great  gi-avity,  and  was  re- 
ceived with  much  ceremony.  At  every  house  we 
came  to,  the  owner  twice  desired  him  to  be  seated ; 
and  when  the  paiwari  was  brought,  he  was  twice 
desired  to  di'ink ;  and  when  he  had  drunk,  the 
woman  in  attendance  immediately  took  the  bowl, 
replenished  it,  and  offered  it  again.  The  same  in- 
vitations to  drink  then  followed  from  the  observant 
host ;  and  after  he  had  again  done  so,  he  handed 
what  remained  to  the  boys.  To  eveiy  invitation  to 
sit  or  to  drink,  or  to  any  expression  of  civility 
whatever,  the  word  "  AVaang "  was  the  invariable 
response.  This,  an  expression  of  polite  acknowledg- 
ment, is  almost  the  only  word  in  their  language  of 
disagreeable  sound.  They  continually  repeat  it,  being 
very  polite  to  each  other. 

At  one  house  we  found  a  man  sittino^  in  his 
hammock,  and  practising  on  a  violin,  A\'hich  he  had 
procured  on  a  \'isit  to  the  coast. 

]\Iy  companion  John  William  pointed  out  a  spot 
in  the  forests  as  the  place  where  he  had  once  en- 
countered and  killed  a  bush-master,  the  most  dan- 
gerous of  snakes.  I  congi-atulated  him  on  this  ;  but 
remarked  that  strong  drink  was  also  dangerous,  and 


90  THE  INDIAN  TBIBEB  OF  GUIANA. 

that  he  should  not  take  so  much  as  he  had  already 
done  that  day.  He  seemed  greatly  amused  at  such 
simplicity,  and  to  convince  me  of  the  strength  of 
his  head  (a  quality  which  they  highly  value),  he 
said  that  he  could  drink  two  bottles  of  English 
porter  without  being  intoxicated.  The  warning  was 
repeated,  but  without  effect. 

The  last  settlement  we  visited  was  much  the 
largest,  and  contained  the  neatest  houses.  Here 
assembled  the  people  from  the  places  we  had  pre- 
viously visited.  The  same  ceremonies  were  gone 
through,  the  same  compliments  passed,  and  paiwari 
was  offered  and  drunk  as  before.  I  was  then  called 
on  to  explain  the  object  of  my  visit,  which  I  en- 
deavoured to  do,  using  the  plainest  terms  I  could 
think  of.  The  chief  followed  my  remarks  with  an 
explanatory  speech,  in  the  course  of  which,  when  he 
stated  my  wish  that  their  children  should  be  placed 
with  me  for  instruction,  I  was  surprised  to  see  some 
of  the  little  ones  run  to  their  mothers,  who  caught 
them  up  in  their  arms,  looking  at  me  with  much 
curiosity  and  no  small  suspicion.  They  were  as  littk> 
inclined  to  place  them  with  me  as  a  civilized  mother 
would  be  to  give  her  darlings  to  the  care  of  an 
Indian. 

All  that  I  could  get  from  these  people  was  a  pro- 
mise to  talk  the  matter  over :  and  as  John  William 
obstinately  declined  going  any  further  that  day,  I 
was  obliged  to  take  my  leave.  Indeed,  he  had  drunk 
so  much  that  his  presence  would  have  been  little 
assistance   to    the   propagation    of  the    Gospel    any- 


THE  FOMEBOON.  91 

where.  The  disgust  I  felt  was  fully  .shared  l)y  the 
Indian  I  had  brought  with  me  ;  avIio,  pointing  to 
the  blood  on  my  foot,  whieh  had  been  cut  in  crossing 
a  swamp,  said,  "You  hurt  yourself:  but  they  mean 
to  get  di'unk  now,  and  will  not  mind  your  words." 

The  results  of  this  little  expedition  were,  on  the 
whole,  of  a  favourable  character.  It  imparted  an 
additional  knowledge  of  Indian  life  and  manners ; 
and  I  found  that  these  "barbarians"  were  "no  ways 
barbarous : ''  but  gentle  and  hospitable  to  strangers, 
and  very  polite  to  each  other,  after  their  o\m  fashion. 
It  was,  however,  too  evident  that  intemperance  was 
the  bane  of  their  race,  and  that  I  must  seek  an 
interpreter  less  addicted  to  that  vice  than  then-  chief ; 
for  whose  friendship  and  assistance  I  could  not  but 
feel  gratefid,  though  his  company  and  example  more 
than  counterbalanced  all  the  help  we  could  derive 
from  the  former,  while  his  habits  remained  unaltered. 

The  number  of  Indian  children  with  me  was  now 
doubled.  They  were  aU  very  docile  and  gentle  in 
their  disjDositions.  Thi'ce  of  the  boys  were  strong 
and  useful  lads,  and  very  expert  in  all  things  neces- 
sary to  a  life  in  the  forests,  as  I  soon  found. 

A  few  days  after  their  arrival,  an  alarm  was  given 
that  a  camudi  snake  had  made  its  appearance  close 
to  the  school :  and  we  proceeded  to  search  for  it.  It 
was  soon  found  in  a  hole,  whither  it  had  retii'ed,  after 
helping  itself  to  a  fowl  belonging  to  Jeannette,  around 
which  it  was  tightly  coiled.  While  the  rest  of  the 
party  stood  by  with  stout  sticks,  one  of  the  Indian 
lads,  who  had  assumed  the  English  name  of  Bai-nwell, 


1)2  TEE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

took  his  bow  and  arrow,  and  liaving  taken  deliberate 
aim  at  the  neck  (which  I  was  unable  to  distinguish 
among  the  variegated  folds  of  its  body),  he  transfixed 
it  with  an  arrow,  the  barbed  point  of  which  stuck 
deep  in  the  ground.  The  snake  immediately  threw 
out  its  body  with  a  convulsive  effort,  and  writhed 
itself  with  the  most  rapid  motions,  until  several  of 
the  vertebrse  were  dislocated  by  the  heavy  blows  it 
received  from  us.  Then  the  youth  Avith  unerring 
aim  sent  another  arrow  through  its  head,  behind 
the  eyes.  The  snake  was  then  hung  up  and  skiim.ed ; 
after  which  its  body  continued  to  contract  and  writhe 
slowly  for  about  two  hours.  It  was  young  and  small, 
being  not  quite  eight  feet  in  length,  though  very  thick 
in  proportion. 

The  cry  of  an  acouri  in  distress  was  heard  one 
day  from  the  opposite  bank  of  the  river.  The  boys 
cried  "Pocoraro,"  its  Arawak  name,  and  one  paddled 
over  alone,  and  found  the  animal  at  the  water's  edge, 
and  a  "  tiger "  killino;  it.  Startled  at  the  sudden 
noise  of  the  little  canoe  crashing  through  the  branches, 
the  latter  retired,  and  ere  it  recovered  from  its  sur- 
prise, the  bold  lad  seized  its  prey,  and  brought  it 
over  in  triumph  to  me. 

Those  Indian  boys  were  of  the  greatest  service  as 
paddlers.  With  their  ready  assistance,  I  could  visit 
any  settlement  in  the  neighbourhood.  But  severe 
fever  came  on  me  ere  w^e  had  gone  over  the  whole 
of  the  adjacent  country.  In  an  intermittent  form 
its  exhausting  attacks  continued  more  or  less  severe 
during  the  next  eleven  months. 


TEE  POMEBOON.  93 

Through  that  trying  time  the  Arawaks  showed 
much  attachment,  and  an  earnest  desire  for  Christian 
knowledge ;  often  waiting  on  the  Sunday  for  hours 
until  the  fit  went  off,  that  I  might  be  able  to  speak 
to  them.  Their  regard  showed  itself  in  many  little 
ways,  as  bringing  fish  (either  fresh  or  smoked),  a  pine- 
apple, or  other  fruit,  or  a  piece  of  cassava  bread :  all 
gifts  of  little  value  in  themselves,  but  highly  valual^le 
from  the  motive  which  induced  them. 

In  the  beginning  of  the  new  year  the  mission- 
cottage  was  completed.  It  had  a  small  gallery  in 
fi'ont  of  the  centre  room,  and  was  built  of  rough 
posts,  with  rods  nailed  across,  to  which  were  tied 
the  trooly-leaves,  forming  the  thatched  sides  and 
partitions.  The  roof  was  also  composed  of  trooly- 
thatch.  But  the  great  advantage  was  its  boarded 
floor,  which  was  thi'ce  feet  from  the  damp  ground. 
I  was  able  to  occupy  this  dwelling  by  the  end  of 
February,  and  resigned  my  former  abode  to  the  school- 
children, whose  friends  removed  the  old  sooty  roof 
soon  after,  and  replaced  it  with  a  new  one,  making- 
it  C[uite  neat  and  comfortable. 

The  chapel  also  had  a  new  thatched  roof  put  on 
it  by  the  Indians.  The  window-shutters  had  long- 
since  been  replaced,  strips  of  leather  cut  from  my 
old  shoes  having  supplied  the  place  of  iron  hinges 
for  a  short  time. 

Some  of  the  Indians  also  began  to  collect  posts 
and  other  materials  for  erecting  a  few  lodging-places 
for  themselves  when  they  came  on  the  Saturday 
evening.     These  were  soon  after  put  up,  though  they 


94  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

exceedingly  disliked  tlie  low  situation ;  and,  indeed, 
to  any  one  who  knows  how  invariably  tliey  select  a 
dry  and  elevated  spot  for  the  site  of  their  settle- 
ments, it  must  appear  no  small  act  of  self-denial 
which  could  have  induced  them  to  frequent  a  place 
so  repugnant  to  their  habits,  and  to  send  their  chil- 
dren to  reside  there. 

By  this  time  the  nature  of  the  position  had  become 
clearer.  The  Indian  country  which  lay  before  us  was 
evidently  very  thinly  inhabited,  but  of  vast  extent.^ 

Two  days'  journey  to  the  northward  was  the  terri- 
tory of  the  Waraus,  stretching  about  two  hundred 
miles  along  the  sea-coast,  and  intersected  by  nume- 
rous rivers. 

^  There  are,  in  tlie  interior  of  Giiiana,  immense  tracts  without  a 
single  human  habitation.  Waterton  says  of  one  region  which  he 
passed  through,  "  The  Indians  are  so  thinly  scattered  in  this  part 
of  the  country  that  there  would  be  no  impropriety  in  calling  it 
uninhabited : — 

"  '  Apparent  rari  errantes  in  gurgite  vasto.'  " 

They  were  somewhat  more  numerous,  as  has  been  said,  in  the 
region  immediately  before  me. 

A  census,  taken  eleven  years  after,  by  ]\Ir.  M'Clintock,  the  post- 
holder  or  officer  charged  with  the  protection  of  the  Indians  in  that 
quarter,  gave  the  following  numbers  : — 

Pomeroon  and  its  Tributaries  .     .     .     •     .  977 

Moruca         „             „  1,161 

Waini           „             „  1,171 

Earima         „             „  956 

4,265 


It  would  be  difficult  to  form  a  correct  estimate  of  the  number 
of  Indians  in  the  entire  province.  They  have  been  variously  stated 
at  7,000,  12,000,  and  even  at  20,000,  or  upwards. 


THE  POMEROON.  95 

In  a  south- westerly  direction,  between  us  and  tlie 
head  of  the  Pomeroon,  were  a  few  hundred  Caribs. 
Behind  them  lay  the  country  of  the  Acawoios,  ex- 
tending very  far  into  the  .interior. 

Beyond  these  latter  were  many  still  wilder  triljes, 
of  some  of  which  the  very  names  were  unknown  to 
us ;  scattered  here  and  there  over  the  vast  space 
lying  without  our  boundary,  between  the  Pacaraima 
mountains  and  the  Orinoco. 

Our  only  foothold  in  that  most  western  region  of 
the  province  had  been  given  us  by  the  coming  in 
of  the  few  AraAvak  families  above  mentioned.  It 
was  indeed  a  "  day  of  small  things ; "  but  other 
families  of  theu*  tribe,  and  eventually  other  races, 
might  lie  led  to  follow  their  example,  by  the  blessing 
of  Him  with  whom  "  all  things  are  possible." 


CHAPTER  VL 


THE    ARAWAKS    OR    LOKONO. 


Their  Character — Weapons — JSTarne — Division  of  Families — Poly- 
gamy— Birth  and  Bearing  of  Children — Paiwari  Feasts — Funeral 
Customs  —  Chiefs — Law  of  Eetaliation  —  Progress  —  Mode  of 
Instruction  —  Indian  Astronomy — Use  of  Pictures  —  Manners 
of  School  Children — Venezuelan  Expedition  —  Visit  to  the 
Akawini  Lake. 

The  Arawaks  liave  always  been  noted  for  their  mild 
and  peaceable  disposition,  and  their  attachment  to 
the  EurojDean  colonists.  They  Avere  much  esteemed, 
and  theu'  alliance  highly  valued  by  the  Dutch,  who 
by  law  exempted  them  from  that  slavery  to  which 
individuals  of  the  other  tribes  were  then  liable  on 
their  beuig  sold  by  each  other.  ^ 

Although  unwarlike  to  a  degree  of  timidity,  and 
desirous  of  preserving  their  independence  without 
fighting,  yet  they  were  sometimes  compelled  to  take 
up  arms,  both  against  the  bush  negroes  and  aggres- 
sive tribes  of  Indians.  Stedman,  in  his  accounf 
of  Surinam,  mentions  an  instance  of  an  Arawak 
who,  having  received  an  act  of  kindness  from  a 
gentleman    of    that    colony,    presented   him  with    a 

1  Bancroft,  p.  271., 


THE  ABAWaKS  or  LOKOKO.  97 

beautiful  boy  of  the  Acawoio  tribe,  whom  lie  had  taktu 
in  war.  He  adds,  that  this  was  extremely  uncommon 
even  in  those  barbarous  times,  as  a  more  peaceable 
people  does  not  exist. 

In  those  casual  encounters  their  weapons  were 
chiefly  bows  and  arrows  and  clubs.  One  kind  of 
club,  which  they  still  make,  though  now  only  as  a 
specimen  of  the  weapons  used  by  their  ancestors,  is 
of  a  very  formidable  description.  It  is  made  of  the 
hardest  and  heaviest  wood,  and  has  a  broad  blade, 
thick  in  the  middle,  and  with  sharp  edges.  The 
handle  is  covered  with  cotton,  wound  tightly  round 
it,  to  prevent  the  hand  from  slipping,  and  it  has 
also  a  stout  loop  of  the  same  material,  which  is 
placed  round  the  wrist.  They  call  it  "  sapakana." 
Some  of  these  were  of  large  size,  and  required  both 
hands  to  wield  them. 

They  are  now  Avell  provided  with  fire-arms,  and 
skilled  in  the  use  of  them.  This  tril)e  furnished  400 
men  at  short  notice,  all  well  acquainted  with  the 
countiy  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  plantations, 
and  of  great  service  as  rangers. 

They  are  called  "Arawaks"  by  the  other  tribes 
and  the  colonists ;  but  that  is  not  the  name  by 
which  they  designate  themselves  in  their  converse 
with  each  other.  Each  Arawak  calls  himself  a 
"Loko;"  and  speaks  of  his  tribe  and  language  as 
those  of  the  "  Lokono,"  which  word  is  the  plural 
of  the  former,  and  literally  means  "  tlie  i^cople."  ^ 

^  Each  American  tribe  seems,  ■witli  national  vanity,  to  consider 
itself  as   pre-eminently  "  the  people."     The  word  "  Carinya,"  by 

H 


98  TEE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

Their  tribe  exhibits  in  its  customs  traces  of  an 
organization  which  was  probably  much  more  perfect 
in  former  times  than  it  is  at  present.  They  are 
divided  into  families,  each  of  which  has  a  distinct 
name,  as  the  Siwidi,  Karuafudi,  Onisidi,  kc.  Un- 
like our  families,  these  all  descend  in  the  female  line, 
and  no  individual  of  either  sex  is  allowed  to  marry 
another  of  the  same  family  name.  Thus,  a  woman 
of  the  Siwidi  family  bears  the  same  name  as  her 
mother,  but  neither  her  father  nor  her  husband  can 
be  of  that  family.  Her  children  and  the  children 
of  her  daughters  will  also  be  called  Siwidi,  but 
both  her  sons  and  daughters  are  prohibited  from  an 
alliance  with  any  individual  bearing  the  same  name; 
though  they  may  marry  into  the  family  of  their 
father,  if  they  choose.  These  customs  are  strictly 
observed,  and  any  breach  of  them  would  be  con- 
sidered as  wicked. 

Mr.  Hillhouse,  who  resided  among  them  for  some 
years,  has  given  the  names  of  various  families  of  this 
tribe,  to  the  number  of  twenty-seven.^ 

The  shades  of  character  among  these  Indians  vary 
as  much  as  in  other  races.  In  general  they  are 
faithful  and  attached  to  their  wives,  with  whom 
they  live  very  happily,    except  where    polygamy  is 

■which  the  Caribs  of  Guiana  designate  themselves,  has  precisely 
the  same  meaning,  "  the  people."  So  also  with  the  neighbouring 
nations. 

^  The  researches  of  Mr.  M'Clintock  have  enabled  him  to  increase 
the  list,  by  the  addition  of  many  fresh  names,  making  more  than 
fifty  now  known  to  us. 


THE  ARAfVAKS  OR  LOKONO.  99 

practised.^  They  are  also  fond  of  their  oliildren,  and 
so  indulgent  that  they  very  rarely  indeed  chastise 
them.  Little  reverence  is  consequently  paid  by  the 
child  to  its  parents ;  the  boys  in  particular  are  so 
little  controlled  by  the  mother,  as  to  be  remarkable 
for  their  disregard  of  her.  In  every  race  there  is 
probably  more  parental  love  than  filial  affection ;  but 
this  seems  particularly  the  case  with  the  Indians. 
The  Indian  mother  may  be  seen  following  and  call- 
ing "  Satchi,  Satchil"  after  her  son,  who  is  perhaps 
pursuing  some  unfortunnte  lizard  with  his  tiny  arrow, 
but  not  the  slio-htcst  notice  will  "  Satchi "  take  of  her, 
until  it  suits  his  pleasure  to  do  so.  This  is  during 
childhood.  But  when  they  grow  w^,  and  become 
themselves  the  heads  of  families,  there  is  no  want 
either  of  respect  or  attachment  towards  their  aged 
parents. 

Parents  frequently  contract  marriages  for  their  chil- 
dren durino;  infancy  or  childhood,  and  this  eng-ap-e- 
ment  is  considered  l)inding  on  the  part  of  the  young 
couple ;    the    females,    especially,    are    allowed    little 

^  The  Indian  wife  would  sometimes  accompany  her  husband  on 
dangerous  expeditions.  Waterton,  describing  one  of  these,  in  which 
the  white  gentleman  commanding  the  party  was  severely  wounded, 
and  two  Indian  chiefs,  his  supporters,  were  killed,  by  the  Maroon 
negroes,  in  1801,  thus  speaks  of  the  Avife  of  one  of  them,  who  had 
accompanied  the  expedition  : — "  She  was  a  fine  young  woman,  and 
had  her  long  black  hair  fancifully  braided  in  a  knot  on  the  top  of 
her  head,  and  fastened  with  a  silver  ornament.  She  unloosed  it, 
and  falling  on  her  husband's  body,  covered  it  with  her  hair,  be- 
wailing his  untimely  end  with  tlie  most  heartrending  cries."  Some 
of  our  Indians  knew  this  woman,  who  died  at  Mahaica  about  tliirty 
years  after. 

H    2 


100  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

choice  in  the  matter.  Sometimes  they  are  promised 
to  persons  who  have  ah'eacly  one  or  more  wives. 
An  incident  of  this  kind  came  under  my  notice, 
soon  after  the  Indians  in  the  Pomeroon  began  to 
attend  instruction. 

A  young  female  was  pointed  out  to  me  as  having 
been  betrothed  to  a  man  who  already  had  a  wife  and 
children.  As  she,  her  father,  and  all  his  family  were 
under  Christian  instruction,  it  became  necessary  to 
interfere.  Her  father  was  therefore  told  that  such 
a  connexion  was  contrary  to  the  law  of  Christ,  and 
must  be  broken  off.  To  this  he  was  very  averse,  and 
urged  his  promise  given,  the  ancient  customs  of  his 
people,  and  many  other  things  in  excuse,  but  at  last 
said  that  he  would  not  enforce  the  matter,  if  the 
other  parties  could  be  induced  to  give  it  up.  The 
young  girl  was  then  called,  and  on  hearing  the  law 
of  Christ  with  respect  to  marriage,  she  at  once 
expressed  her  determination  to  obey  it. 

A  few  days  after,  the  young  man  came,  as  it  seemed, 
to  claim  his  bride,  and  was  not  a  little  amazed  to  find 
how  the  matter  stood.  He  was  a  native  of  Ituribisi, 
where  the  instructions  of  the  Rev.  W.  Austin  were 
beginning  to  take  effect.  He  had  been  a  hearer  of 
the  Word  in  that  quarter,  which  had  not  been  without 
some  good  effect  on  his  mind,  and  now,  finding  him- 
self assailed  where  he  had  little  expected  any  such 
thing,  he  reluctantly  withdrew  his  claim.  He  desired, 
however,  permission  to  see  the  young  woman  before 
he  went  away.  She  was  sent  for,  and  he  then 
formally  demanded  restitution  of  a  hammock,  some 


THE  A RA WaKS  OR  LOKONO.  \  Q 1 

calico,  a  comb,  and  various  other  articles  which  he 
had  formerly  given  her,  and  which  were,  in  fact, 
nearly  the  whole  of  her  little  property.  This  demand 
was  complied  with,  the  matter  ended  much  more 
agreeably  than  I  had  expected,  and  a  dee})ly-rooted 
evil  custom  received  a  severe  blow  at  a  critical  time. 
The  young  woman  led  an  exemplary  life,  and  died 
unmarried  four  years  after. 

There  are  no  particular  marriage  ceremonies  ob- 
served in  their  heathen  state.  The  wife's  father  ex- 
pects the  bridegroom  to  work  for  him  in  clearing  the 
forest,  and  in  other  things,  and  the  young  couple  often 
remain  with  him  until  an  increasing  family  renders 
a  separate  establishment  necessary. 

On  the  birth  of  a  child,  the  ancient  Indian 
etiquette  requires  the  father  to  take  to  his  ham- 
mock, where  he  remains  for  some  days  as  if  he 
were  sick,  and  receives  the  congratulations  and  con- 
dolence of  his  friends.  An  instance  of  this  custom 
came  soon  under  my  own  observation  ;  where  the 
man,  in  robust  healrh  and  excellent  condition,  without 
a  single  bodily  ailment,  was  lying  in  his  hammock 
in  the  most  provoking  manner  ;  and  carefully  and 
respectfully  attended  by  the  women,  while  the  mother 
of  the  new-l)orn  infant  was  cooking — none  apparently 
regarding  her  '. ' 

^  That  AViis,  however,  no  hiifihship  for  an  hnlian  mother,  who 
suffers  but  little.  I  once  saw  a  Warau  woman  carry  her  infant, 
two  hours  after  its  birth,  from  one  cottage  to  another,  at  some 
little  distance.  She  also  carrieil  lier  hammock,  and  tied  it  up 
for  use,  though  encumbered  willi  the  nesv-borii  babe. 


102  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

The  women  carry  their  infants  in  small  hammocks, 
which  are  slung  over  one  shoulder.  When  the  child 
has  grown  bigger,  it  is  carried  upon  the  mother's  hip, 
clinging  to  her  body,  with  one  leg  before  and  the 
other  behind  it.  They  suckle  one  child  until  the 
birth  of  another,  and  even  for  a  short  time  after. 
The  want  of  cows  and  goats,  together  with  their 
great  reluctance  to  use  the  milk  of  any  animal,  is 
probably  the  reason  for  this  custom,  which  must 
weaken  the  mother  considerably. 

The  boys  are  early  trained  to  fish  and  paddle,  and 
as  they  get  older  they  accompany  the  men  on  their 
hunting  expeditions.  The  girls  are  obliged  to  labour 
at  an  early  age,  and  assist  the  women,  whose  time 
is  much  more  fully  occupied  than  that  of  the  men. 

They  lead  a  simple  life,  without  quarrels,  except 
such  as  arise  from  that  fruitful  source  of  evil,  intoxi- 
cation. Their  native  drink,  the  paiwari,  has  been 
already  mentioned.  It  is  prepared  in  a  very  dis- 
gusting way.  The  flat  cakes  of  cassava  bread  are 
toasted  brown,  boiling  water  is  poured  on  them,  and 
the  lumps  which  remain  are  masticated  by  Indian 
women.  This  assists  the  fermentation,  after  which  a 
feast  is  given,  where  drinking  and  dancing  are  kept 
up  until  all  the  liquor  is  consumed.  I  have  seen 
Caribi  women  sitting  round  a  large  earthen  vessel, 
all  chewing  cassava  in  the  disgusting  manner  above 
described.  There  is  a  drink  made  in  a  more  cleanly 
manner  from  potatoes,  called  kasiri.  Several  other 
beverages  are  made  and  used  by  Indians. 

When  a  death  takes  place  among  this  tribe,  notice 


THE  ARAWaKS  or  LOKONO.  10^ 

is  given  to  the  neighbouring  settlements  l"^y  the  dis- 
charge of  guns,  and  preparation  is  immediately  made 
for  the  funeral.  They  formerly  used  to  make  a  iiidc 
coffin,  by  hollowing  a  solid  piece  of  wood,  or  by  cut- 
ting a  small  canoe  in  halves  to  receive  the  body  :  but 
now  some  of  them  manacle  to  construct  one  of  boards. 
There  were  certain  dances  connected  with  their  ancient 
funeral  customs,  which  will  be  hereafter  described,  as 
also  the  ceremonies  practised  by  their  sorcerers,  and 
the  superstitions  inculcated  by  them. 

Their  chiefs,  or  captains,  were  either  appointed,  or 
confirmed  in  their  office,  by  the  governor  of  the  colony. 
They  were  formerly  expected  to  summon  their  men 
together  at  his  command  ;  and  to  lead  them  to  battle 
if  required.  At  present,  there  is  scarcely  the  shadow 
of  authority  possessed  by  any  of  them,  except  over 
his  own  family.  The  power  of  the  ancient  cacique 
has  perished  with  the  title. 

When  any  offence  is  taken,  they  seldom  manifest 
it  otherwise  than  by  not  speaking  to  the  offending 
party.  This  seems  to  grieve  them  much.  If  one  tells 
another  that  he  is  had,  it  is  almost  looked  upon  as  a 
curse.  As  to  profane  swearing,  it  is  unknown  in  their 
language,  Avhich  even  wants  the  word  to  express  it. 
After  a  long  inquiry,  one  of  their  chiefs  told  me  : 
"  We,  in  our  language,  do  not  swear  ;  it  is  only  your 
people  who  do  that."^  A  just  reproof,  surely,  of  those 
profane  habits  by  which  too  many  of  our  countrymen 
are  distinguished  abroad  as  well  as  at  home  ! 

^  A  drunhn  Indian  will,  however,  sometimes  swear  fearfully  in 
Engliih. 


104  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

When  any  crime,  such  as  murder,  was  committed, 
they  followed  strictly  the  law  of  retaliation.  A 
tragical  incident  of  this  nature  took  place  the  year 
before  I  went  among  them.  Two  young  men,  sons  of 
their  oldest  chief,  were  invited  to  a  paiwari  dance  at 
an  Indian  settlement,  near  the  Arapaiaco.  One  or 
two  white  men  also  attended,  as  was  too  frequently 
the  case.  These  left  the  following  morning,  after  the 
dance  was  over,  but  had  not  long  been  gone  before 
the  younger  brother,  who  had  taken  up  his  gun,  as 
if  going  to  his  canoe,  turned  round  and  discharged 
it  at  his  wife. 

She  received  the  contents  in  her  bosom  as  she  was 
kneelino;  on  the  ground  with  her  babe  at  her  breast 
— fell  on  her  face,  and  expired.  The  cause  of  this 
(if  the  deed  were  intentional)  was  probably  jealousy 
of  something  that  had  occurred  during  the  debauch 
of  the  previous  night.  No  inquiry  was  made,  how- 
ever, as  to  his  motives.  The  nearest  relative  to  the 
poor  young  woman  started  up,  declared  his  intention 
of  seeking  vengeance,  and  then  hastened  after  the 
white  men ;  to  whose  laws  he  intended  to  consign 
the  culprit.  But  before  he  could  overtake  them,  the 
fearful  deed  had  been  avenged  by  another  hand. 

When  the  young  man  saw  what  he  had  done,  he 
stood  for  some  little  time  aghast ;  then,  perceiving 
his  countrymen  approaching  to  seize  him,  he  fled 
to  the  forest.  He  was  soon  taken  and  brought 
back  to  the  fatal  spot.  There  two  of  them  held  him 
by  the  outstretched  hands,  and  he  submitted  to  his 
fate  from  his  own  brother,  Kaikaiko,  who  took  u])  a 


THE  Alt  A  WaKS  OR  LOKONO.  \  0  5 

billet  of  wood,  and  killed  him  by  a  blow  upon  the 
temples. 

This  tragical  occurrence  was  related  to  me  l)y  the 
settlers,  and  by  the  family  at  whose  dwelling  it  took 
place.  An  aged  Indian  pointed  out  to  me  the  now 
abandoned  spot  where  it  occurred,  and  where  these 
two  unhappy  victims,  who,  but  for  an  cA'il  practice, 
might  have  witnessed  the  introduction  of  the  hope 
of  the  Gospel,  and  grown  old  surrounded  by  their 
children,  now  sleep  in  one  untimely  grave. 

The  elder  brother,  who  had  thus  become  the  minis- 
ter of  justice,  and  doul)tless  thought  at  the  time  that 
he  was  acting  right,  never  seemed  happy  afterwards. 

Tlic  horror  excited  by  the  luclaiiclioly  event  above 
related  had  a  beneficial  effect  upon  the  minds  of  those 
who  saw  or  heard  of  it.  It  showed  more  plainly  than 
any  words  could  do  the  evil  tendency  of  those  drunken 
feasts  in  which  they  so  much  delighted  ;  and  was  not 
without  its  effect  in  inducing  many  to  listen  more 
readily  to  the  doctrines  which  cause  men  to  live 
soberly,  righteously,  and  godly  in  this  present  world. 

It  now  became  a  pleasant  sight  to  see  the  Indian 
canoes  coming  in  from  diilerent  directions  on  the 
Saturday  evening  and  Sunday  morning.  Our  congre- 
gation had  already  increased  to  al)out  t'ighty-four  per- 
sons. A  sudden  and  manifest  improvement  took  place 
in  their  apparel,  all  being  anxious  to  procure  European 
clothiug.^     Owing  to  the  utter  darkness  of  the  minds 

^  One  poor  fellow  came  to  me  with  a  brilliant  sly-bliie  hat,  a 
very  striking  article,  evidently  manufactured  for  a  savage  market. 
On  a  visit  to  the  coast  he  had  been  persuaded  by  some  sharp  sales- 


106  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

of  most,  undue  importance  soon  began  to  be  attached 
to  this ;  and  it  became  necessary  to  caution  them 
repeatedly  against  supposing  that  any  change  in 
external  appearance  could  avail  in  the  sight  of  Him 
who  "  looketh  on  the  heart." 

Several  of  the  people  now  became  so  anxious  for 
instruction  as  to  bring  sufficient  cassava  bread  to  last 
them  as  food  for  a  week,  with  what  few  fish  the  river 
afforded. 

In  the  course  of  the  year  we  were  visited  for  the 
second  time  by  the  Eev.  Mr.  Duke,  who  baptized 
twelve  adults,  and  twenty-five  children  of  different 
ages. 

Other  catechumens  now  came  forward,  and  the 
mission  cottage  was  well  frequented  by  them.  It  was 
desirable  not  only  to  impart  to  them  the  knowledge 
that  leadeth  to  salvation,  but  also  to  improve  their 
minds,  and  enlarge  the  circle  of  their  ideas,  by  de- 
scriptions of  other  countries  and  people,  to  them  most 
wonderful.  The  most  valuable  book  (not  of  a  sacred 
character)  which  I  possessed  for  this  purpose,  was  a 
volume  of  the  "  Saturday  Magazine,"  which  the  late 
Bishop  Coleridge,  thinking  it  might  prove  useful,  had 
given  me  at  Barbados,  with  some  others  and  his 
blessing.     The  Arawaks  were  much  interested  in  the 

man  to  purchase  it  at  a  high  price  :  and  he  was  now  in  great  trouble, 
having  been  told  by  some  officious  person  that  his  soul  was  in  sad 
case,  and  that  no  Christian  minister  would  ever  baptize  and  marry 
a  man  who  had  been  guilty  of  the  Avicked  vanity  of  wearing  such 
a  hat.  He  was  much  relieved  when  he  found  that  I  did  not  con- 
sider uncultivated  taste  a  fatal  barrier  between  him  and  his  God. 
That  man  and  his  wife  were  until  death  among  our  steadiest  converts. 


THE  ARA]rAKS  OR  LOKOXO.  107 

engravings.  The  wicker  idol  in  which  the  ancient 
Britons  burnt  their  victims,  particuUirly  excited  their 
wonder,  and  they  could  not  comprehend  how  the 
former  inhabitants  of  England  could  have  been  so  cruel. 
They  considered  them  even  worse  than  their  ancient 
enemies,  the  Caribs.  They  thus  learned  to  think  more 
highly  of  the  power  of  the  Gospel  of  peace,  which 
can  abolish,  wherever  it  fully  prevails,  the  cruel  and 
barbarous  works  of  heathen  darkness.  In  this  manner 
it  was  easy  to  blend  religious  instruction  with  interest- 
ing information,  when  catechetical  duties  ^^  ere  over. 

They  were  also  anxious  to  teach  me  all  they  knew 
themselves,  which  was  but  little,  except  the  arts  of 
hunting  and  fishing  jieculiar  to  their  country. 

They  had  some  rude  knowledge  of  the  stars,  which 
was  probably  acquired  by  the  experience  of  their 
ancestors  in  former  voyages.  They  distinguished 
some  of  them  as  constellations  ;  one  of  which  is 
called  the  Camudi,  from  its  fancied  resemblance  to 
that  snake.  They  call  the  Milky  Way  by  two  names, 
one  of  which  signifies  the  path  of  the  maipuri  or 
tapir ;  and  the  other  is  "  Waie  onnakici  abonaha," — 
the  path  of  the  hearers  of  ivaie, — a  species  of  whitish 
clay,  of  which  their  vessels  are  made.  The  nebulous 
spots  are  supposed  to  be  the  track  of  spirits  whose 
feet  were  smeared  with  that  material. — Venus  is 
distinguished  by  the  name  of  "AVarakoma;"  and 
Jupiter  is  generally  called  "  Wiwa  kalimero,"  the  star 
of  brightness. 

Great  was  their  astonishment  at  learning  some 
of  the  more  simple  facts  of  astronomy,  especially  the 


108  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

cause  of  eclipses,  which  had  always  puzzled  and 
alarmed  them.  They  did  not  show  much  emotion, 
however,  at  the  appearance  of  the  large  comet  of 
1843,  which  terrified  the  Africans  on  the  coast,  and 
the  Indians  of  the  distant  interior.  The  Arawaks 
seemed  to  think  an  eclipse  much  more  portentous 
than  the  "star  with  the  tail."^ 

The  properties  of  the  magnet  excited  much  won- 
der; and  a  small  pocket  compass  was  regarded  with 
great  interest.  They  all  looked  upon  it  as  something 
supernatural,  and  though  its  use  was  soon  understood, 
yet  they  regarded  it  with  evident  suspicion  for  some 
time.  A  very  grave  man,  who  had  been  induced  to 
take  it  into  his  hand,  after  it  had  been  shaken  and 
turned  in  every  possible  way,  when  he  saw  it  still 
pointing  towards  the  north  star,  delivered  his  opinion 
in  these  words  :  "  It  is  alive."  When  convinced  that 
the  evil  spirits  had  nothing  to  do  with  it,  they  said 
that  the  knowledo-e  of  its  construction  was  a  oift 
from  God  to  the  white  man. 

They  were  totally  unacquainted  with  geography 
beyond  the  limits  of  Guiana.  They  knew  that  the 
white  people  came  from  the  other  side  of  the  great 
sea ;  but  were  amazed  at  hearing  that  it  was  so  large 
as  to  take  a  vessel  some  weeks  to  cross  it.  They  were 
always  delighted  to  be  shown   on  a  map  the  various 

^  Schomburgk,  on  an  island  of  the  Essequibo,  witnessed  the 
terror  of  the  Indians  who  formed  his  crew.  The  Arecunas  present 
wilh  him  called  the  comet  "  Wataima ;  "  and  the  Wapisianas 
"  Capishi  ; "  Avhich,  in  their  respective  tongues,  signify  "The 
S2nrit  of  the  stars."  The  Macusis  called  it  "  Cd,[ioeseima,"  "a  Jieri/ 
cloud,"  or  "  Woe-inopsa,"  "  a  sun  casting  its  liyhi  behind." 


THE  arawaks  or  lokono.  jgj^ 

countries  of  Europe,  or  those  parts  of  the  world  from 
whence  the  Africans  and  Hindoos  liad  been  brought 
to  their  shores.  Of  history  and  the  affairs  of  other 
nations  they  knew  nothing.  They  had,  however,  an 
indistinct  idea  that  there  liad  been  great  wars  between 
the  white  nations  in  the  days  of  their  fathers.  They 
knew  the  name  of  one  European  warrior  alone,  Bona- 
parte ;  whose  fame  had  reached  the  ears  of  some, 
long  before  they  had  heard  the  name  of  the  Saviour 
Jesus  pronounced  except  in  a  profone  or  blasphemous 
manner. 

We  were  much  in  want  of  a  set  of  Scripture  prints, 
which  would  have  been  of  great  helj)  in  enabling 
them  to  understand  the  historical  parts  of  Holy  Writ. 
These  they  could  comprehend  but  very  imperfectly 
by  oral  communication.  A  set  of  engravings  had 
been  sent  out  from  England,  but  never  reached  their 
destination ;  and  I  was  often  obliged  to  make  a  rude 
sketch  before  they  could  understand  the  most  simple 
historical  circumstance. 

The  Creation  and  the  fall  of  man,  the  Deluge,  and 
the  giving  of  the  Law  on  Sinai,  were  those  parts  of 
Old  Testament  history  which  most  interested  them  ; 
but  they  seemed  to  regard  them  with  transient  interest 
as  mere  historical  facts ;  and  one  of  them  observed, 
after  I  had  been  carefully  explaining  to  them  the 
Ten  Commandments  :  "  This  word  is  good,  but  we 
knew  most  of  it  before."  Nothing  but  the  love  of 
God,  as  manifested  in  His  Son  working  righteousness, 
and  dying  for  sins,  seemed  to  create  a  i^ermanent 
interest  in  any  of  them. 


110  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

Our  school  gradually  increased  to  nearly  thirty 
Arawak  children,  but  there  were  always  some  absent, 
from  occasional  scarcity  of  food,  and  their  natural 
desire  of  change.  I  was  greatly  averse  to  letting 
them  go  home  ;  but  soon  found  that  they  would  stay 
away  altogether  if  they  thought  undue  restraint  were 
practised  ;  and  after  a  while  it  became  apparent  that 
the  good  they  did  in  teaching  their  friends  at  their 
homes  in  the  forest  more  than  made  amends  for  the 
evil  occasioned  by  their  irregularity. 

These  children  used  to  assist  in  cultivating  a  little 
garden,  and  keeping  the  paths  free  from  weeds. 
Occasionally  they  went  to  gather  the  forest  fruits. 
A  fine  cocorite  palm  grew  close  to  the  little  school, 
and  the  day  on  which  one  of  its  enormous  bunches  of 
fruit  was  cut  was  always  a  time  of  rejoicing.  Shoot- 
in  o-  with  bows  and  arrows,  either  at  birds  or  at  a  mark 
set  up  for  the  purpose  ;  catching  fish  with  a  small 
rod,  and  other  Indian  pursuits,  filled  up  the  time 
which  was  not  occupied  by  the  school.  I  made 
several  attempts  to  introduce  English  games,  as  ball, 
&c.  among  them  ;  but  they  met  with  no  success.  Even 
their  amusements  were  all  of  a  practical  character, 
and  such  as  would  help  them  to  get  a  living. 

They  generally  bathed,  morning,  noon,  and  evening, 
and  more  expert  swimmers  are  scarcely  to  be  found. 
They  used  to  spring  into  the  water,  one  after  another, 
in  rapid  succession,  with  a  great  noise  and  splashing, 
keeping  in  rapid  motion,  and  swimming  with  the 
head  often  under  water.  Sometimes  they  amused 
themselves  with  turning  over,  striking  at  their  com- 


■St:,  .-^ 


% 


THE  ARA  WaKS  OR  LOKOXO.  m 

panions  with  their  feet  at  the  same  time,  wliicli  was 
dexterously  avoided  by  diving. 

With  the  stronger  lads  to  paddle  the  canoe  we 
often  voyaged  to  the  habitations  of  their  friends — 
going  by  water  up  the  little  streams,  and  then  jour- 
neying some  distance  on  foot.  Sometimes  we  crossed 
a  shallow  stream  dryshod,  on  fallen  timbers  lying  in 
the  bottom,  and  found  on  our  return  that  the  rising 
of  the  tide  compelled  us  to  strip  ere  we  could  recross 
it.  1  had  perfect  confidence  in  my  little  crew,  who 
could  swim,  and  at  the  same  time  carry  my  clothes 
dry  above  the  water,  and  their  sharp  eyes  would  soon 
have  detected  the  presence  of  one  of  the  huge  water- 
snakes  or  camudis  which,  lurking  in  such  damp  and 
gloomy  places,  are  chiefly  dreaded. 

Some  of  our  Christian  Indians  now  commenced  the 
practice  of  family  prayer.  Very  cheering  it  was  to 
hear  from  their  open  lodging-places,  in  the  stillness 
of  night  or  early  morning,  the  low  sound  of  the 
simple  petitions  ofi*ered  in  their  own  tongue  ;  a  sure 
proof  that  they  no  longer  looked  on  the  Great  Father 
as  afar  off,  but  as  the  God  "  who  heareth  prayer," 
to  whom  "all  flesh"  should  "come." 

About  this  time  our  little  congregation  was  thrown 
into  excitement  by  seeing  three  strange  canoes  pass 
the  chapel  during  evening  prayer.  Their  crews  were 
of  all  shades  of  colour  ;  and  their  high-peaked,  broad- 
brimmed  hats  and  large  mantles,  plain  or  striped, 
showed  them  to  be  foreigners.  They  were  twenty-six 
in  number,  all  well  armed  and  strong  men  ;  neither 
woman  nor  boy  being  with  them.     We  saw  them  land 


112  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

at  the  wood-cutter's  settlement,  and  after  a  pause 
proceed  down  the  river.  T  soon  after  went  over  to 
make  inqumes,  and  the  proprietor,  who  was  in  the 
commission  of  the  peace, -said  that  the  appearance 
and  behaviour  of  the  strangers  had  been  so  suspicious 
that  he  felt  it  his  duty,  in  the  post-holder's  absence, 
to  follow  and  demand  their  business.  Having  no 
men  with  him,  save  an  English  servant  who  had 
been  a  soldier,  and  a  traveller,  who  was  on  his  way 
from  the  Orinoco,  he  asked  me  to  take  two  Arawak 
men  and  a  boy,  who  had  paddled  me  over  the  river, 
and  accompany  him.  Three  sturdy  Warau  women 
made  the  rest  of  our  crew,  the  eldest  of  them 
steering. 

We  found  the  party  about  eight  miles  off,  encamped 
for  the  night,  and  preparing  coffee,  the  fragrant  odour 
of  which  spread  over  the  river.  Their  appearance,  as 
seen  partly  by  the  moonbeams  broken  by  the  forest 
trees  and  partly  by  their  flickering  fires,  conveyed 
the  idea  of  a  gang  of  banditti,  which  impression  was 
not  diminished  by  the  scowling  looks  with  which 
they  greeted  our  intrusion.  Two  white  men,  respect- 
ably dressed,  were  their  leaders.  One  lay  still  in 
his  hammock  as  if  sick ;  the  other,  a  handsome 
young  man,  came  to  meet  us  in  a  defiant  manner ; 
went  into  a  furious  passion  when  asked  his  name 
and  business  ;  and  refused  to  give  any  account  of 
himself.  After  a  sharp  altercation,  my  companion 
arrested  him ; — a  bold  act,  and  probably  without 
sufiicient  warrant.  We  were  entirely  in  the  hands 
of  the   strangers.      There    was   no  force   to   support 


TJfE  AnAWAKS  OE  LOKOXO.  113 

the  arrest,  save  the  wliite  man,  'I'urner,  wlio  stood 
behind  lii.s  master  in  tlie  attitude  of  "attention," 
and,  witli  only  a  constable's  baton,  seemed  ready  to 
arrest  or  fight  the  whole  foreign  party,  if  the  word 
were  given  ;  and  Cornelius  the  Arawak,  wlio,  paddle 
in  hand,  placed  himself  by  me.  The  rest  of  our 
party  had  kept  in  or  near  the  l)oat. 

Fierce  glances  and  munnurs  were  exchano-cd  amonir 
the  dusky  group  around  us,  who  seemed  about  to  use 
their  knives  when  the  old  soldier  laid  his  hand  on 
their  leader's  shoulder,  and  told  him  that  he  was  his 
prisoner.  But  the  latter,  restraining  his  passion  by 
a  strong  effort,  quieted  them  by  a  few  words  in 
Spanish.  Then  turning  to  us,  he  said.  '•  I  have  told 
my  men  to  allow  me  to  be  taken,  or  where  would 
you  be  ?  You  cannot  stop  them — they  will  proceed. 
Schomburgk  is  now  in  our  country  :  reprisals  will  l)e 
taken  upon  him." 

The  other  white  man,  who  probably  thought  that 
the  matter  had  oonc  far  enouMi,  now  got  out  of 
his  hammock,  slipped  on  a  white  jacket,  and  in 
good  English,  but  with  a  foreign  accent,  politely 
requested  that  proceedings  might  be  stayed.  He 
then  explained  that  his  companion  was  the  son  of 
the  late  Colonel  Hamilton,  famous  for  his  services 
to  Bolivar  in  the  Venezuelan  revolution  ;  tliat  he 
had  travelled  by  way  of  the  Cuyuni  to  seek  a  path 
by  which  his  numerous  herds  might  be  brought  for 
sale  in  our  colony ;  and  was  now  returning  by  a 
different  route.  Letters  to  prove  the  identity  of 
Carlos  Hamilton  were  produced,  and  the  party  then 

I 


114  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

allowed  to  proceed,  with  a  supply  of  salt  fish,  biscuits, 
&c.  which  my  companion,  with  provident  liberality, 
had  brought  for  their  relief  if  he  should  find  them  in 
want,  and  able  to  give  a  good  account  of  themselves. 

We  afterwards  heard  that  their  expedition  had 
been  undertaken  chiefly  for  a  political  object,  having 
reference  to  the  vexed  boundary  question,  and  the 
military  expedition  then  fitting  out  in  Georgetown 
to  recapture  Pirara,  They  had  been  to  Demerara, 
and  left  without  callinsf  on  the  authorities.  The 
gentleman  who  had  so  blandly  explained  matters  to 
us,  and  appeared  to  be  their  real  leader,  was  said  to 
be  Senhor  Ayres,  the  commander  of  the  Brazilian 
force  which  had  destroyed  the  Pirara  mission  two 
years  before. 

Our  Indians,  who  knew  nothing  of  politics,  thought 
that  their  object  was  to  capture  and  enslave  them, 
as  in  the  olden  time ;  but  tranquillity  was  restored 
when  they  learned  that  the  party  had  left  the 
country,  and  we  saw  them  no  more. 

The  Rev.  Mr.  Duke  died  suddenly  about  this  time. 
He  was  deeply  lamented.  His  part  in  the  founda- 
tion of  the  mission  has  been  noticed :  he  had  ^dsited 
it  more  than  once,  and  seen  with  satisfaction  its  pro- 
mising appearance. 

In  the  following  year  most  of  the  settlers  left  the 
river,  owing  to  the  failure  of  the  arnotto  trade,  and 
the  introduction  of  white  pine  and  other  cheap 
woods  from  North  America,  which  in  a  o-reat  deoree 
superseded  the  more  durable  but  costly  productions 
of  the  native  forests. 


THE  ARAWaKS  or  LOKOXO.  1 1  5 

Being  now  completely  isolated  from  civilized  «oeit'ly, 
save  when  an  occasional  traveller  asked  shelter,  an 
excellent  opportunity  was  aftbrded  me  of  investigating 
the  Indian  manners,  ideas,  lanouao;es,  and  traditions. 
Some  of  the  last  will  be  given  in  the  conclusion  of 
this  work. 

It  soon  became  possible  to  extend  the  sphere  of 
labour.  The  Arawaks  informed  me  that  many  of 
their  tribe  resided  at  a  place  called  Akawini,  and 
some  offered  to  accompany  me  on  a  visit  to  them. 

Ha^dng  visited  the  settlement  of  Cornelius,  and 
slept  there,  we  set  out  early  next  morning,  and  had 
a  cool  walk  of  some  hours  through  the  forest.  At 
length  we  came  to  a  very  narrow  stream,  Avhich  it 
was  necessary  to  descend.  The  Indians  had  expected 
to  find  a  small  canoe  which  they  usually  kept  there, 
but  some  person  had  removed  it, 

A  tree  of  enormous  size  had  fallen  near  the  spot, 
and  lay  with  a  part  of  its  roots  elevated  several  feet 
from  the  ground.  An  Indian  climbed  upon  it,  and, 
standing  high  above  our  heads,  with  a  heavy  piece 
of  wood  struck  one  of  the  broad  fluted  projections 
of  the  trunk  near  the  root,  which  gave  a  loud  ring- 
ino;  sound  that  echoed  through  the  forest  and  across 
the  swamp.  This  was  to  give  notice  to  the  party 
who  might  have  borrowed  the  canoe,  that  we  were 
in  need  of  it. 

A  man  and  a  woman,  who  had  been  fishing  in  it, 
returned  as  soon  as  they  heard  the  signal.  It  was 
old  and  rotten,  and  the  sides  were  so  \o\v  that  the 
water  entered  in  three  places,  as  soon  as  our  party 

I  2 


116  THE  INDIAN  TBIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

were  seated.  To  remedy  this,  some  thick  stems  of 
the  moco-moco  plant  were  cut  and  grooved.  These 
being  fitted  on  to  the  upper  edge  of  the  canoe,  made 
it  an  inch  or  two  higher  ;  and  we  then  proceeded, 
sitting  as  still  as  we  could ;  one  of  the  party  baling 
out  all  the  way,  while  another  paddled  us  through 
the  still  water. 

We  came  to  a  beautiful  savannah  and  lake,  and 
saw  on  a  small  island  the  cottage  of  the  principal 
man  in  that  secluded  district.  It  was  embosomed 
amid  the  tall  trees,  and  the  evening  sun  shone 
brightly  on  its  thatched  roof.  Its  owner  received 
us  kindly,  and  summoned  his  people,  with  whom  we 
had  an  interesting  meeting,  which  was  prolonged 
to  so  late  an  hour  that  several  of  them  were  unable 
to  return  to  their  homes  that  night.  They  there- 
fore took  up  their  quarters  in  an  old  house  on  the 
island.  One  of  the  corner  posts  of  this,  being  rotten, 
gave  way.  A  child  fell  into  the  fire  beneath  her, 
and  was  severely  burned.  Fortunately  no  other 
person  was  injured,  but  this  distressing  accident 
threw  a  gloom   over  our  visit. 

These  people  had  had  less  intercourse  with  ci\T.- 
lized  men  than  any  others  whom  I  had  yet  seen, 
owing  to  their  retired  situation.  The  lake  discharges 
its  superabundant  waters  into  the  Pomeroon  by  a 
small  stream,  which  is  blocked  up  with  fallen  trees. 
They  said  that  no  white  man  had  previously  visited 
their  settlements. 

My  attention  wos  soon  after  drawn  to  other  races, 
and  the  visit  to  that  secluded  lake  was  not  repeated. 


THE  ABAWaKS  OE  LOKONO.  \  \  7 

But  from  time  to  time  its  inhabitants,  brought  by 
Cornelius  and  others  of  their  countrymen,  came  forth 
to  join  us. 

jMeanwhile,  the  Arawaks,  who  dwelt  nearer  to  civi- 
lized man,  were  also  receiving  benefit  :  especially 
those  of  the  Ituribisi  lake,  and  the  Arual)isi  coast,  ^ 
between  the  Pomeroon  and  the  island-studded  mouth 
of  the  Essequibo. 

^  "Ituribisi  "  and  "Aruabisi."  These  names  respectively  signify- 
in  Arawak,  "the  resorts  of  the  Ituri,"  or  large  red  howling 
monkey,  and  of  the  "  Arua,"  or  jaguar.  The  sense  of  the  latter  is 
preserved  in  the  name  of  the  adjacent  "Tiger"  Island,  as  the 
colonists  call  it ;  though  the  word  "  Aruabisi,"  as  applied  to  the 
coast,  has  been  somewhat  strangely  corrupted  by  them  into 
"  Arabian." 

The  language  of  the  Arawiiks  is  the  softest  of  all  the  Indian 
tongues.  Though  deficient,  as  compared  with  ours,  in  the  number 
of  words,  it  is  capable  of  great  nicety  of  expression.  I  was  sur- 
prised at  the  number  of  the  moods  and  tenses  of  its  verbs.  In 
some  respects  it  is  copious,  as  in  words  expressing  family  relation- 
ship, which  are  more  strictly  definite  than  ours.  For  example,  in 
the  words  "brother"  and  "sister,"  each  has  three  forms,  according 
to  the  age  and  sex  of  the  speaker. 

An  Arawak  man  will  say — 

r  elder  brother d'abugi'ci 

J    younger  brother    .  .  .  d'augici 

^y  1     .         r         elder         ) 

sister  <  \    d'aiyuradatu 

1^  I    or  younger   J  '' 

An  Arawak  ivoman  will  say — 

elder  sister d'atilatu 

younger  sister d'augitu 

brother  {        ^^^^'^         i  d'aciligi'ci 
\   or  younger   J  ° 

Other  very  striking  peculiarities  abound  in  this  as  in  the  other 
Indian  tongues,  the  -words  of  which  differ  greatly  from  each  other, 
while  in  their  construction  all  are  totally  opposite  to  our  modes  of 
speech. 


my  ' 


118  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

Many  of  the  former  were  brought  out  of  the  forests 
on  the  shores  of  that  beautiful  lake  by  the  efforts  of 
the  Eev.  W.  Austin,  Eector  of  St,  John's,  in  their 
neighbourhood.  His  two  daughters  opened  a  school 
for  the  Arav/ak  children,  acquired  their  language,  and 
devoted  themselves  to  the  daily  task  of  teaching,  and 
caring  for  them  in  health  and  sickness. 

A  few  miles  from  the  (now  settled  and  cultivated) 
Aruabisi  coast,  are  three  other  lakes, — the  Capoue, 
Quacabuca,  and  Tapacuma.  Much  good  was  done 
some  years  after  among  the  few  Indians  who  dwelt 
on  their  shores,  by  the  Rev.  J.  F.  Bourne  and  the 
the  Rev.  H.  Hunter. 

But  in  that  district  there  were  many  drawbacks, 
not  the  least  being  the  facility  with  which  ardent 
spirits,  the  red  man's  curse,  are  obtainable. 

Still  it  was  evident  to  all  that  a  rapid  change  had 
taken  place  among  the  Arawaks  on  our  western 
border.  Much  interest  in  them  was  felt  and  expressed, 
at  that  time  in  the  colony  at  large  :  and  we  had 
reason  to  thank  Him  "  who  giveth  the  increase." 


CHAPTER  Vir. 

THE    CARIBS,    OR   CARINYA. 

Account  of  the  Writer's  First  Visit  to  the  Country  of  tlie  Caribs — 
Their  Costume  and  Appearance — Their  national  Cliaracter  and 
Customs — A  Glance  at  their  Condition  and  Ilahits  duiing 
the  last  Century — Their  cruel  "Wars — ^Vncient  Chiefs — Former 
Cannibalism. 

The  ii]-)per  part  of  the  Ponicroon  is  inhabited  ])y  the 
Caribs,  who  occupy  a  largo  tract  of  country,  including 
not  only  the  banks  of  that  river,  but  those  of  the 
Manawarin,  a  triljutary  of  the  Moruca.  They  are 
more  numerous  in  that  district  than  in  any  other 
part  of  the  lower  lands  of  Guiana. 

Their  settlements  were  much  higher  up  the  river 
than  the  site  of  the  mission,  and  they  would  not 
visit  it,  though  often  passing  in  their  canoes.  The 
appearance  of  their  naked  bodies,  and  faces  painted 
T\dth  the  Ijright  vermilion  of  the  arnotto,  was  wild 
and  savage.  At  some  distance  from  us  there  was  a 
"  water-side,"  or  landing-place,  on  the  banks  of  the 
river,  where  they  often  took  up  their  quarters  for 
the  night ;  and  the  sound  of  the  bamboo  flute  pro- 
ceeding from  their  bivouac  would  sometimes  reach 
our  ears,  when  the  noisy  parrots  had  retired  to  roost, 


120  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

and  the  last  breeze  from  the  distant  sea-coast  had 
died  away  at  sunset.  Their  music  when  close  at 
hand  is  harsh  and  unpleasant,  but  it  was  so  mel- 
lowed by  passing  over  the  still  water  as  to  possess 
a  plaintive  and  melancholy  sweetness  ;  so  that  one 
might  have  fancied  that  they  were  bewailing  their 
benighted  condition. 

Such  was  by  no  means  the  case.  They  had,  as  yet, 
no  idea  of  anything  better  than  their  present  state ; 
and  while  they  possessed  health,  were  jDerfectly  satisfied 
to  eat,  drink,  and  enjoy  the  passing  moment,  without 
care  for  future  interests,  whether  of  a  temporal  or 
eternal  nature. 

On  one  occasion,  some  members  of  the  family  of 
their  chief  had  called  to  visit  me.  I  was  surprised 
at  first,  but  soon  discovered  from  their  manner  that 
they  were  slightly  intoxicated,  which  accounted  for 
so  unusual  a  circumstance. 

Having  acquired  all  the  information  I  could  con- 
cerning them,  the  Arawaks  at  the  mission  were  in- 
formed of  my  intention  to  visit  the  Caribi  country. 
Some  of  them  offered  to  accompany  me.  The  two 
nations  seemed  on  friendly  terms,  often  trafficking 
with  each  other  ;  but  a  quarrel  had  taken  place  iu 
the  neighbourhood  a  short  time  before  between  two 
individuals,  in  the  course  of  which  the  one  betook 
himself  to  his  cutlass,  while  the  other  ran  for  his 
club.  The  affair  ended  with  mutual  threats.  It  did 
not  seem  expedient  to  take  any  adult  person  with  me, 
as  unjDleasant  results  might  ensue ;  for  even  friendly 
feelings,  as  I  knew  by  experience,  might  lead  to  a 


THE  CAHTBS,  OR  CARINYA.  121 

paiwari  drinking,  and  a  feast  or  fray  would  alike  be 
but  little  conducive  to  the  end  in  view.  The  youths 
who  generally  paddled  my  canoe  seemed  best  fitted  to 
be  my  companions  in  this  expedition. 

Accompanied  by  four  of  these  lads,  I  set  out  one 
Monday  morning  in  June  1841  ;  the  Arawaks,  who 
had  been  to  church  on  the  previous  day,  standing  on 
the  banks  of  the  river,  and  waving  their  hands,  in 
token  of  wisliing  good  success  to  the  Gospel  of  Christ 
amonor  their  neiahl^ours  and  ancient  foes.  We  went 
briskly  up  the  river  for  several  miles  with  the  flowing 
tide,  and,  turning  up  a  small  stream  to  the  left,  arrived 
before  noon  at  the  first  Caribi  settlement,  called 
"  Kamwatta "  (or  the  Bamboo),  from  an  enormous 
cluster  of  those  trees  which  stands  near  it.  This  was 
the  residence  of  "  France,"  the  brotlicr  of  tlicir  chief. 
He  was  not  at  home,  being  absent  with  most  of  the 
male  inhabitants,  but  his  two  wives  were  present,  with 
several  other  women,  all  busily  engaged  in  their  usual 
occupations. 

The  appearance  of  those  women  was  very  barbarous, 
as  is  indeed  the  case  with  most  of  the  Caribi  females. 
Their  dress  was  merely  a  narrow  strip  of  blue  cloth, 
and  their  naked  bodies  were  smeared  with  the  red 
am  otto,  which  gave  them  the  appearance  of  bleeding 
from  every  pore.  As  if  this  were  not  sufficiently 
ornamental,  some  of  them  had  endeavoured  to  improve 
its  appearance  by  blue  spots  upon  their  bodies  and 
limbs.  They  wore  round  each  leg,  just  below  the 
knee,  a  tight  strap  of  cotton,  painted  red,  and  another 
above  each  ankle.     These  are  fastened  on  while  the 


122  THE  INDIAN  TBIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

girl  is  young,  and  hinder  tlie  growth  of  the  parts  by 
their  compression,  while  the  calf,  which  is  unconfined, 
appears,  in  consequence,  unnaturally  large.  All  the 
Caribi  women  wear  these,  which  they  call  sapuru,  and 
consider  as  a  great  addition  to  their  beauty.  But  the 
most  singular  part  of  their  ai^pearance  is  presented  by 
the  lower  lip,  which  they  perforate,  and  wear  one, 
two,  or  three  pins  sticking  through  the  hole,  with  the 
points  outward.  Before  they  procured  pins,  thorns  or 
other  similar  substances  were  thus  worn.  Should  they 
wish  to  use  the  pin,  they  will  take  it  out,  and  again 
replace  it  in  the  lip  when  its  services  are  no  longer 
required. 

Of  these  women  I  inquired  respecting  their  husbands, 
and  received  an  answer  in  their  language,  very  co^^ious, 
but  to  me  perfectly  unintelligible.  Perceiving  this, 
they  pointed  to  a  man  standing  at  some  distance, 
whom  I  found  to  be  a  stranger  from  the  interior.  He 
was  the  most  picturesque  object  I  had  yet  seen  in 
Guiana,  possessing  a  symmetrical  figure,  which  was 
seen  to  great  advantage  in  his  native  costume.  His 
name  he  said  was  "  Wericum."  This  I  afterwards 
found  to  be  a  corruption  of  the  English  word  "  wel- 
come." 

The  cloth  which  is  worn  by  the  Caribi  men,  secured 
by  a  cord  round  the  loins,  is  often  of  sufficient  length 
to  form  a  kind  of  scarf.  As  it  would  otherwise  trail 
on  the  ground,  they  dispose  it  in  a  graceful  manner 
over  the  shoulders,  so  that  part  of  it  falls  on  the 
bosom,  while  the  end  hangs  down  the  back.  It  is 
often   adorned   with  large  cotton  tassels,  and  is  the 


THE  CABIBS,  OR  CARINYA.  \  ^.J 

most  decent  and  serviceable,  as  well  as  the  most 
picturesque  covering  worn  by  any  of  the  native  tribes. 
The  e<~)ronal  of  feathers  for  the  head  is  sometimes 
worn,  but  not  generally.  The  head  is  usually  adorned 
by  a  large  daub  of  arnotto  on  the  hair  above  the 
brow,  and  the  forehead  and  cheeks  are  painted  in 
various  patterns  with  the  same  vermilion  colour. 
Tliis  renders  them  ferocious  in  their  appearance, 
and  was  probably  adopted  l)y  their  ancestors  with 
that  view,  but  the  modern  Caribs  have  an  idea  that 
it  adds  greatly  to  the  beauty  of  their  faces.  Some 
men  of  this  tribe  also  smear  their  bodies  with  the 
arnotto,  in  the  manner  already  mentioned  as  practised 
by  the  women. 

There  was  at  that  settlement  an  old  man,  whose 
white  hair  and  eyes  dim  with  ao-e  showed  that  he 
must  have  far  exceeded  the  usual  term  of  human 
life.  He  lay  in  his  hammock  continually,  and  seemed 
to  have  lost  part  of  his  faculties.  That  old  man  could 
doubtless  once  have  told  many  a  tale  of  strife  and 
carnage,  derived  from  his  ancestors,  and  some  perhaps 
witnessed  l>y  himself,  during  the  sanguinary  contests 
in  which  his  nation  was  engaged  in  his  youth. 

The  stranger  whom  I  have  mentioned  received 
directions  from  the  principal  wife  of  the  master  of 
the  settlement,  and  I  understood,  by  the  names  used, 
that  he  was  to  guide  me  through  the  forest  to  the 
residence  of  the  chief.  To  this  I  gladly  assented,  and 
dismissed  my  lads  with  the  canoe,  with  directions  for 
them  to  go  to  a  certain  place  on  the  banks  of  the 
main  river,  where  I  would  rejoin  them.     The  Carib 


124  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

tlien  threw  over  liis  shoulder  the  eleg-ant  tasselled 
scarf  worn  by  his  nation,  and,  taking  his  gun,  led  the 
way  into  the  forest.  The  walk  was  cool,  the  trees 
magnificent  in  size  and  beauty,  and  the  path  good, 
with  the  exception  of  a  swamp  which  we  had  to  cross. 
As  this  was  always  a  difiicult  task,  and  one  which 
occasioned  me  some  delay,  I  lost  sight  of  our  guide  for 
a  time,  but  he  soon  reappeared,  standing  among  the 
tall  trees  on  a  bank  above  us ;  and  as  he  saw  Ifili,  the 
Arawak  boy  whom  I  had  retained  with  me,  fetching 
water  in  a  large  leaf  to  cleanse  my  feet,  he  smiled, 
apparently  at  the  inconvenience  of  shoes  and  other 
necessaries  of  civilized  life. 

Borowai,  which  was  the  name  of  the  village  we 
next  came  to,  was  superior  in  the  neatness  and  clean- 
liness of  its  houses  to  any  Indian  place  which  I  had 
yet  seen.  Although  several  of  the  inhabitants  were 
unclothed,  yet  none  of  the  women  were  smeared  with 
the  arnotto  like  those  at  Kamwatta.  The  chief  was 
called  "  Commodore  "  by  the  settlers,  as  was  his  father 
before  him,  and  it  has  become  the  fixed  surname  of 
the  family.  He  was  gone  farther  into  the  interior 
with  his  son  and  most  of  the  men,  to  my  regret ;  for 
I  had  calculated  ou  persuading  him  to  accompany  me 
to  visit  his  people.  The  principal  part  of  the  design 
was  thus,  to  all  appearance,  frustrated. 

There  were  but  three  men  present,  one  of  whom, 
I  was  happy  to  find,  spoke  a  little  English.  Having 
seated  myself  on  a  low,  rudely-carved  stool  in  the 
house  appointed  for  conference  among  the  men,  I 
began  to  talk  with  them,  telling  them  that  good  people 


THE  CABIBS,  OR  CARINYA.  125 

in  my  own  country  had  sent  me  over  the  great  sea, 
to  teach  them  how  they  might  serve  "  Tamosi"  accept- 
ably, and  live  with  Him  after  dcatli.  They  listened 
with  great  interest,  and  gave  me  a  large  pine  and  a 
cluster  of  ripe  hananas  at  taking  leave,  which  showed 
that  they  were  not  displeased  at  the  visit. 

There  was  but  one  settler  residing  in  their  country, 
and  he  was  on  the  point  of  quitting  it.  We  slept  at 
his  house,  which  was  situated  on  a  hill  named  Carowob, 
the  burial-place  of  the  ancient  Caribi  chiefs  of  Pome- 
roon,  and  at  early  dawn  again  went  on  our  way. 
About  9  A.M.  we  arrived  at  a  place  where  the 
Pomeroon  divides  into  two  l)ranches  :  the  left  beinfj 
the  main  stream,  while  that  to  the  right  is  called 
Issororo.  Up  this  latter  we  proceeded.  The  weather 
was  delightful,  and  though  our  prospect  was  very 
limited,  yet  each  oliject  was  beautiful  and  striking  : 
the  venerable  forests,  with  the  manicole  palms  growing 
out  of  the  river,  and  reaching  a  great  height ;  the 
mirror-like  stream,  reflecting  every  leaf  on  its  unruffled 
surface  ;  the  fish  springing  from  the  waters,  and  the 
splendid  azure  butterflies  fluttering  among  the  leaves, 
— all  rendered  the  scene  interestino^  to  a  stranjrer. 
Over  our  heads  the  king  of  the  vultures  hovered 
motionless  on  his  strong  pinions,  while  many  of  the 
common  species  were  at  a  respectful  distance,  flying 
in  circles  through  the  sultry  air.  To  complete  a 
picture  so  purely  South  American,  a  party  of  Caribs, 
with  their  bright  copper  skins,  black  hair,  and  brows 
variously  adorned,  now  passed  us.  They  were  seated 
apparently  on  the  surface  of  the  water,    theii*   frail 


126  THU  INDIAN  TBIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

canoes,  or  woodskins,  made  of  tlie  bark  of  tlie  purjDle- 
lieart  tree,  being  at  a  little  distance  scarcely  visible 
beneath  tbem. 

The  people  at  the  settlements  on  the  Issororo  seemed 
rather  pleased  than  otherwise  at  our  visit,  when  they 
understood  its  object.  Most  of  the  men  were  absent 
from  this  district  also,  so  that  we  seemed  to  have  come 
at  a  very  unseasonable  time.  In  seeking  for  the  first 
settlement,  Pegassa,  we  took  a  wrong  direction,  which 
led  us  by  an  abandoned  path,  first  through  a  very 
disagreeable  and  difficult  swamp,  and  then  through  an 
old  provision  ground,  so  overgrown  with  thick  grass, 
shrubs,  and  briers,  that  it  was  only  with  great  exertion 
we  could  get  through.  The  sun  is  intensely  hot  in 
these  fields,  as  the  surrounding  forest  prevents  the 
breeze  from  cooling  the  air.  Having  at  length  reached 
the  right  path,  I  was  surprised  at  a  loud  scream  from 
three  little  Caribi  girls,  who  were  terrified  at  the 
object  which,  with  scorched  face,  and  clothes  soiled 
with  mud  from  the  swamp,  and  covered  with  grass- 
seeds  from  the  jungle,  suddenly  presented  itself  before 
them.  One  of  them  took  to  her  heels,  and  ran  shriek- 
ing to  give  the  alarm.  As  this  was  an  unpleasant 
introduction  to  her  family,  it  seemed  best  to  follow 
and  attempt  to  pacify  her,  but  her  swiftness  rendered 
the  attempt  vain.  Her  mother  came  hastily  from  the 
house  to  meet  her,  and  perceiving  the  object  of  her 
child's  alarm,  said  something  which  quieted  her. 
There  was  no  one  but  this  woman  at  the  place  ;  and 
as  I  had  collected  a  few  words  of  their  language  at 
Borowai,  I  asked  for  "  Wakuri,"  the  man.     She  smiled 


THE  CARIES,  OR  CARINYA.  127 

at  the  bad  pruimiiciatiou  of  the  C'aril)i,  and  pointed 
with  her  hand  to  the  path  which  led  to  the 
next  settlement,  Tonanibo.  We  ai-rived  there  much 
fatigued. 

A  very  tall  man,  named  Yan,  soon  came  in  from 
hunting,  and  to  him  I  told  the  object  of  my  visit. 
He  seemed  favourably  disposed,  and,  when  I  left, 
gave  me  a  large  pine  in  token  of  good  feeling.  An 
old  woman  added  a  piece  of  cassava  bread. 

After  three  days'  absence  we  retained  to  the  mis- 
sion ;  and  the  first  question  put  by  the  Arawaks  was 
this,  "  Did  you  get  any  of  them  ?"  It  showed  a  right 
feeling  in  some  of  them,  who  seemed  very  anxious  to 
spread  the  little  knowledge  they  possessed. 

Tlu'ee  weeks  elapsed  without  our  hearing  anything 
of  the  Caribs.  I  had  given  up  all  hopes  of  them,  and 
was  meditating  another  visit,  when  on  my  return 
from  a  day's  journey  among  the  Ai-awaks,  I  was  told 
they  had  been  at  the  mission  inquiring  for  me.  The 
next  day  (Sunday)  we  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  old 
Commodore  arrive  with  the  people  from  his  village. 
The  next  Sunday  he  again  came  with  nine  of  his 
people,  and  the  following  week  we  rejoiced  to  see  five 
canoes  full  of  Caril)s  of  both  sexes,  and  among  them 
our  friends  from  the  Issororo.  I  soon  after  visited  the 
settlement  of  the  chief  to  induce  him  to  place  his 
children  under  my  care  for  instruction,  and  to  use 
his  influence  with  the  people  of  his  tribe  for  the  same 
purpose.     This  he  promised  to  do. 

The  national  character  of  the  Caribs  has  ever 
been   that    of  obstinate,   fearless  bravery.     They  are 


128  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

acknowledged  by  the  other  tribes  as  superior  in 
desperate  courage,  and  have  always  been  dreaded  by 
them.  They  are  fully  aware  of  this,  and  there  is 
consequently  as  much  national  pride  in  them  as  in 
any  European  race.  The  Arawaks  also  possess  a 
great  degree  of  national  pride,  but  it  is  founded 
more  on  superior  intelligence  and  civilization  ;  while 
that  of  the  Caribs  arises  from  the  remembrance  of 
former  domination  and  the  consciousness  of  daring 
valour.  They  are,  however,  very  credulous,  and  easily 
excited  by  any  flying  rumour,  of  which  I  have  known 
several  instances. 

They  are  not  larger  in  person  than  the  people 
of  other  tribes,  but  are  generally  very  well  pro- 
portioned. Their  young  men  may  claim  preference 
over  those  of  the  other  aboriginal  races  for  elegance 
of  form. 

Their  dress,  and  custom  of  painting  their  bodies, 
has  been  already  described.  They  also  lubricate  their 
skins  with  oil,  made  of  the  seeds  of  the  cartiba-tree. 
They  consider  this  and  the  use  of  the  arnotto  as  a 
great  improvement  of  their  beauty. 

The  women  of  this  tribe  are  noted  for  weaving 
excellent  and  durable  hammocks  of  cotton,  which  they 
cultivate  for  that  purpose.  These  are  all  made  by 
hand,  and  the  process  is  very  slow  and  tedious  ;  but 
the  hammocks  so  made  are  said  to  surpass  all  others. 
They  form  an  important  article  of  their  traffic ;  but, 
though  expensive,  the  price  is  by  no  means  an  ade- 
quate remuneration  for  the  time  and  labour  bestowed 
on  them. 


.       THE  C A  NIBS,  OR  CABINYA.  129 

Their  customs  with  respect  to  m.imnge  do  not 
greatly  difler  from  those  of  the  other  tril)e.s,  in  the- 
treatment  of  the  dead,  their  liahits  are  said  to  have- 
been  peculiar.  If  the  person  deceased  were  of  some- 
distinction,  his  bones,  after  burial  for  some  months, 
were  cleaned  by  the  women,  and  carefully  preserved  in 
their  houses.  This  custom  was  practised  by  several 
of  the  tribes  of  Guiana,  some  of  Mhicli  immersed  the 
body  iu  water  until  the  bones  had  been  picked  clean 
by  the  pirai  and  other  fish,  when  they  were  carefully 
dried,  tinged  with  red,  and  suspended  in  the  roof  of 
their  lial)itation,  as  the  greatest  proof  of  attachment 
which  could  be  shown/ 

This  custom  of  j^reserving  the  bones  of  their  dead 
for  some  time,  though  still  observed  in  remote 
places,  is  now  becoming  obsolete,  and  must  expire  as 
Christianity  spreads  among  them. 

It  is  diihcult  for  any  one  who  should  visit  the 
Caribs  at  their  peaceful  settlements  to  believe  that 
they  are  the  descendants  of  those  savage  warriors  who 
spread  terror  over  the  AVest  Indian  Islands,  and  a 
great  portion  of  the  continent  of  South  America. 

I  found  them  in  a  tranquil  state,  undisturbed  except 
l>y  occasional  quarrels  among  themselves,  which  arose 
at  a  paiwari  feast,  or  from  the  use  of  rum.  A\^hen. 
excited  they  are,  however,  ungovernably  fierce.  I  once 
met  a  Carib  who  had  lost  a  portion  of  his  no^e,  wliidi 
had  been  bitten  off  by  his  own  brother,  as  he  said,  in 
a  drunken  quarrel.  8uch  occurrences  were  not  veiy 
fi-equent ;    and  disputes  were  generally  taken  to  the 

^  Stedmaii,  cli;ip.  xv. 
K 


130  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

post-liolders,  or  others,  who  used  their  influence  to 
prevent  quarrelling  and  fighting  between  them  ;  for 
whose  protection  the  Indians  were  grateful,  and  l;)y 
whose  determinations  they  would  faithfully  abide. 

But,  up  to  the  close  of  the  last  century,  their  savage 
propensities  had  full  scope.  When  any  dispute  hap- 
pened with  another  tribe,  they  were  accustomed  to 
attack  those  who  had  offended  them,  and,  surrounding 
their  scattered  villages  in  the  night,  would  make  them 
prisoners  ;  the  men,  who  would  be  likely  to  escape, 
were  put  to  death,  while  the  women  and  children  of 
both  sexes  were  reserved  for  sale/  Sometimes  they 
attacked  their  enemies  openly  in  the  day-time  ;  and 
it  is  said  to  have  been  a  boast  of  theirs,  that  they 
would  paddle  their  canoes  against  the  current  to  the 
settlements  they  intended  to  attack,  that  the  sound  of 
their  paddles  might  give  warning  of  their  approach, 
and  their  enemies  ^Drepare  to  engage  them. 

At  that  time  the  Caribs  were  considered  as  the 
most  numerous  as  well  as  the  most  warlike  of  all  the 
tribes.  They  were  independent  of  the  colonists, 
though  latterly  in  alliance  with  them.  They  had  no 
strictly  hereditary  sovereigns  : — if  the  son  of  a  great 
leader  equalled  his  father  in  bravery  and  skill,  he  might 
succeed  to  his  power  ; — if  not,  they  would  choose 
another  to  head  them  in  any  warlike  undertaking.  It 
was  necessary  for  the  candidates  for  such  an  ofiice  to 
possess  more  strength  and  courage  than  their  fellows, 
and  to  be  perfectly  acquainted  with  every  art  and 
stratagem  of  savage  warfare.  They  were  required,  by 
1  Bancroft,  p.  258. 


THE  CARIBS,  OR  CARINYA.  131 

long  fasting,  to  give  proof  of  their  powers  of  endur- 
ance, and  to  sliow  their  bodily  strength  l)y  bearing 
heavy  burdens.  It  has  1)een  even  said,  that  the  Carib 
chief  who  aspired  to  the  honour  of  commanding  his 
brethren,  was  exposed  to  the  biting  of  ants  for  a 
certain  time/  The  man  who  could  thus  bear  torture 
and  fatigue  of  any  kind,  and  was  a  stranger  to  fear, 
was  chosen  to  be  their  captain  ;  and  the  bows  and 
arrows  of  the  tribe  were  laid  at  liis  feet  in  token  of 
obedience.^ 

Those  customs  were  gradually  laid  aside.  It  was 
the  evident  interest  of  the  colonists  to  flatter  the  pride 
of  the  Indian  chiefs,  which  they  effectually  did  by  pre- 
senting to  them  insignia  of  office,  consisting  of  a  plate 
of  one  of  the  precious  metals  to  be  worn  on  the  bosom, 
and  a  silver-headed  staff  of  office  to  be  borne  in  the 
hand.  By  degrees,  the  Indians  came  to  look  upon 
these  as  indisjDcnsable  to  the  office ;  and  the  power 
of  conffi-ming  the  appointment  of  their  chiefs  fell 
into  the  hands  of  the  colonists.  The  honour  of  the 
chieftainship  is  at  present  but  small. 

The  alliance  of  the  Dutch  colonists  with  this  tribe 
greatly  assisted  in  saving  them  from  destruction  during 
the  insurrection  of  theii-  slaves  in  1763.  The  Caribs 
kiUed  many,  as  appeared  by  the  number  of  dried  hands 
which  they  brought  in.     For  each  of  these  the  sum  of 

^  Abbe  Raynal's  History  of  the  Indies,  book  xiii. 

2  The  war  councils  of  the  island  Caribs  are  said  to  have  been 
held  in  a  secret  dialect  or  jargon,  known  only  to  their  chiefs  and 
elders.  Tlie  men  were  initiated  in  this  only  after  attaining  dis- 
tinction as  warriors  j  the  women,  never. 

K   2 


132  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

twenty-five  florins  was  usually  paid,  and  for  a  living 
captive  fifty. 

Such  is  one  j)ortion  of  the  dreadful  picture  which 
the  life  of  the  Indian,  as  well  as  of  every  other  race  in 
the  colony,  presented  during  those  sad  times.  But 
that  is  not  all.  The  Caribs  are  said  to  have  eaten  the 
bodies  of  the  slain.  This  is  expressly  asserted  by  Ban- 
croft, who,  as  a  resident  in  the  colony,  had  the  best 
opportunity  of  knowing  the   truth. 

Another  writer,  who  w^as  himself  engaged  soon 
after  in  the  same  warfare,  thus  writes  of  the  Caribs : 
"  However  unnatural  it  may  seem,  and  however  much 
it  has  been  contradicted,  they  are  anthropophagi,  or 
cannibals  ;^  at  least,  they  most  certainly  feast  on  their 
enemies,  whose  flesh  they  tear  and  devour  with  the 
avidity   of  wolves."^ 

No  other  tribe  near  the  coast  of  Guiana  has  been 
so  recently  accused  of  cannibalism ;  and  it  is  probable 
that,  even  with  respect  to  the  Caribs,  exaggeration  has 
prevailed.  It  is,  however,  impossible  to  disprove  the 
accounts  handed  down  to  us ;  though  it  would  l3e  plea- 
sant to  do  so.    It  is  needless  to  say  that  this  custom  no 

1  Humboldt  says  that  the  Caribs  of  Guiana  were  not  man-eaters, 
like  those  of  the  islands,  and  those  whom  he  met  at  the  Spanish 
missions  had  certainly  abandoned  the  practice  long  before.  Yet, 
with  some  inconsistencj^,  he  repeatedly  uses  the  above  epithets 
in  speaking  of  the  inciu-sions  and  deeds  of  the  heathen  Caribs  of 
Guiana. 

2  Stedman,  chap.  xv.  The  same  author  also  mentions  it  inci- 
dentally in  other  parts  of  his  work,  as  a  well-known  fact.  He  also 
obtained  a  flute,  made  by  them,  of  a  thigh-bone  of  one  of  their 
enemies,  of  which  lie  lias  given  a  representation. 


rilE  ('Ah' IBS,  OR  CABIXYA.  133 

longor  prevails,  and  of  their  present  halnts  it  lias 
been  observed  :  "  It  is  trne  the  Caribiscc  make  liutes 
of  the  thigh-bones  of  their  enemies,  but  they  abhor  the 
idea  of  eating  their  flesh  or  drinking  their  1)lo()d,  and 
this  abhorrence  is  general. "' 

Beinof  desirous  of  knowino-  the  ideas  of  the  existing 

o  o  o 

race  as  to  those  practices  of  their  ancestors,  I  once 
inquired  of  an  intelligent  young  Christian  Caril).  He 
became  much  excited,  seemed  both  ashamed  ami  indig- 
nant, and  answered,  ''  That  he  had  heard  of  their  doing 
such  things,  but  Jic  thouyht  they  must  have  eaten  the 
flesh  of  animals,  while  they  pretended  to  eat  that  of 
their  enemies."  I  made  no  further  inquiiy,  as  it 
seemed  to  give  them  pain.  Wherever  Christianity 
prevails,  there  barbarous  practices  must  not  only  fall, 
Init  come  to  be  regarded  with  horror  and  surprise. 
]\Iay  God  grant  that,  even  in  Hindostan,  future  gene- 
rations may  yet,  in  the  fulness  of  Gospel  light,  doubt 
the  reality  of  the  Suttees,  and  other  abominations  of 
their  fathers  ! 

Long  before  the  abolition  of  negro  slavery,  the 
custom  of  the  Indian  tribes  enslaving  each  other 
was  discountenanced  by  the  British,  and  the  pur- 
chase of  slaves  so  taken  was  prohibited.  This  was 
successful  in  removing  a  great  inducement  to  pre- 
datory expeditions,  which  were  generally  attended 
with  bloodshed.  It  was,  however,  accompanied  by 
a  melancholy  circumstance.  "  A  Caribi  chief,  in- 
dignant at  the  refusal  of  the  Governor  to  accept  of 
a  fine  slave,  immediately  dashed  out  the  brains  of 
1  ^I.  ]\Iaitin,  \\'est  Indies,  p.  53. 


134  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

the  slave,  and  declared  that  for  tlie  future  his  nation 
should  never  give  quarter."  ^ 

"The   dark   places   of  the   earth   are   full   of    the 
habitations  of  cruelty." 

^  The  usual  club  of  the  Caribs  is  made  of  the  heaviest  wood  in 
tlie  forest ;  it  is  about  eighteen  inches  long,  flat,  and  square  at  both 
ends,  but  heavier  at  one  end  than  the  other.  It  is  thinner  in  the 
middle,  and  wound  round  with  cotton  thread,  with  a  loop  to  secure 
it  to  the  wrist.  It  is  called  by  them  "  Potu."  One  blow  with  this 
club,  in  which  they  sometimes  fixed  a  sharp  stone,  will  scatter  the 
brains.  They  used  to  fix  the  stone  in  the  future  club  by  sticking 
it  in  the  tree  while  growing  ;  it  soon  became  firm,  and  in  due  time 
the  tree  was  cut  and  shaped  according  to  the  fancy  of  the  Indian. 
This  latter  kind  is,  however,  seldom  met  with,  and  the  weapon  is 
sufiiciently  formidable  when  made  of  wood  alone. 


CHAPTER  Vlll. 

VISIT    TO    THE    ACAWOIOS. 

•lournoy  throuyh  the  Caribi  Country  to  an  Acawoio  Settlement — 
Kecoption  and  liesults  of  the  Visit — Description  of  the  Acawoiob 
— Their  Persons,  Ornaments,  &c. — The  Blow-pipe  and  Ourali, 
or  Arrow  Poison — The  llaiarri,  and  ^Method  of  poisoning  Fish 
— Their  roving  Disposition,  and  long  Journeys  for  Traffic  and 
Plunder — The  Small-pox — State  of  the  Pomeroon  Mission  in 
1842. 

The  two  tribes,  the  Amwak  and  Caribi,  continued  to 
meet  at  the  mission  on  the  most  friendly  terms,  and 
their  lodging-places  formed  a  small  village  along  the 
bank  of  the   river.     The   settlements    of   each   tribe 
were   occasionally  visited ;    those    of   the  Caribs   the 
more  frequently,   as  they  were  the  least  advanced. 
On  one  of  those  occasions,  we  saw  at  a  landing- 
place  on  the  bank  of  the  river  one  of  those  beautifully 
spotted  but  destructive  animals  which  infest  the  coun- 
try.    It  was  approaching  the  water  to  drink,  and,  as 
the  canoe  ran  ashore,  it  placed  itself  on  a  fallen  tree, 
where  it  stood  with  its  brilliant  eyes  fixed  upon  one  of 
the  lads,  who  went  forward  with  his  paddle  to  drive  it 
away.     It  was  not  till  the  numljer  of  its  assailants  lu:d 
increased  that  it  retreated ;  which  it  did  with  a  light 


136  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

and  agile  motion,  of  which  those  who  have  seen  those 
animals  only  in  confinement  can  have  but  little  idea. 
.  The  Caribs  on  the  Issororo  continued  to  show  every 
willingness  to  receive  Christian  instruction  ;  and  at 
Pegassa,  where  we  usually  took  up  our  quarters  for  the 
night,  the  people  who  assembled  for  evening  prayers 
would  sit  for  a  long  time  afterwards,  listening  to  words 
which  were  interpreted  by  one  of  their  countrymen. 
On  one  of  those  occasions  the  scene  was  very  impres- 
sive. Our  place  of  meeting  was  a  small  area  in  the 
centre  of  the  village,  where  the  white  sandy  soil  was 
kept  free  from  weeds.  Here,  with  the  bright  tropical 
moon  over  head,  sat,  or  squatted,  a  group  of  wild- 
looking  people  in  every  attitude  of  attention,  listening 
to  the  "  good  word."  It  was  indeed  a  scene  of  beauty, 
from  the  various  kinds  of  trees  and  shrubs  seen  in  the 
clear  moonlight,  while  the  solemn  stillness,  unbroken 
save  by  the  low  chirping  of  various  insects,  made  it 
seem  as  if  Nature  were  hushed  to  hear  of  the  sufferings 
of  her  Lord.  •  .    -     .  .  . 

The  children,  who  had  been  so  alarmed  at  my  first 
appearance  among  them,  had  long  since  got  over  their 
fright,  and  some  were  attendants  at  the  mission- 
school. 

From  thence  I  set  out  one  morning,  under  the 
escort  of  Yan  and  one  or  two  other  Caribs,  to  visit 
every  settlement  in  that  quarter.  The  presence  of 
those  guides  insured  a  good  reception  at  every  place 
we  came  to,  and  our  company  gradually  increased, 
till  at  last  wc  had  twelve  fine-looking  men  in  our 
train.      In   the    more   remote   settlements   there    was 


VISIT  TO  THE  ACAH'OIOS.  137 

not  a  shirt,  frock,  or  other  European  garment  to  be 
seen  ;  the  people  all  looked  wild  and  careless,  lieing 
perfectly  satisfied  with  their  condition.  The  stream 
becoming  smaller  as  Ave  ascended  it,  further  progress 
was  only  practicable  in  a  very  small  canoe,  wliieli 
would  scarcely  hold  three  persons.  Our  companions 
went  along  a  footpath,  being  frequently  lost  to 
sio-ht  for  a  time,  and  then  were  seen  emerccinix  from 
the  forest  and  crossing  the  stream  before  us  on  fallen 
trees,  which  form  the  usual  bridges  of  the  Indians. 
Some  of  these  the  canoe  must  l)c  hauled  over,  and 
others  it  passes  under,  the  people  inside  lying  down 
to  avoid  coming  in  contact  with  them.  At  last  we 
quitted  the  river,  and  proceeded  through  a  very 
marshy  forest.  They  then  halted,  and  told  me  that 
we  had  p)assed  all  the  Caribi  settlements,  and  were 
now  entering  the  country  of  the  Acawoios. 

Having  expressed  a  wish  to  proceed,  they  agreed 
to  conduct  me  to  a  settlement  called  Konosa.  As 
we  drew  near  it,  twelve  or  thirteen  dogs,  which 
heard  our  approaching  footsteps,  came  rushing  down 
the  path,  and  made  directly  at  me,  as  the  most 
unusual  object,  but  were  driven  back  by  the  paddles 
of  the  Caribs,  who  ran  forward  to  my  assistance. 
The  settlement  we  found  to  be  in  great  confusion. 
There  were  an  equal  number  of  other  dogs  seated 
on  a  long  rude  table,  each  being  tied  to  a  stout  bar 
of  wood  fastened  to  the  posts  of  the  house.  An 
Acawoio  woman  was  endeavouring  to  catch  those 
which  were  loose,  and  tie  them  up  in  like  manner, 
to  keep  them  from  her  guests.     Most  of  them  were 


138  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

growling  and  snarling  with  all  tlicir  might,  and 
the  efforts  of  the  woman  to  restore  order  among 
six-and-twenty  dogs  were  ineffectual,  until  she  had 
chastised  the  most  noisy  with  a  long  switch. 

In  answer  to  my  inquiries,  the  Caribs  told  me  that 
the  master  of  the  settlement  carried  on  a  traffic  with 
those  animals,  which  were  of  an  excellent  hunting 
breed.  He  soon  made  his  appearance,  and  saluted 
me  in  Creole  Dutch. 

Yan  then  entered  into  a  long  conversation  with 
him,  and  at  my  desire  explained  the  little  he  had 
learned  himself:  told  him  of  the  intentions  of  some 
of  the  Caribs  to  learn  the  good  word  of  Cod :  and 
asked  him  to  come  with  his  family  to  the  mission, 
as  people  of  all  nations  were  called  by  the  Son  of 
Cod.  The  old  man  listened  with  great  attention  to 
our  Caribi  friend,  who  was  simple-minded  and  earnest, 
and  prevailed  with  him  to  give  his  consent.  I  was 
myself  perfectly  useless  in  the  conference,  from 
ignorance  of  their  tongue. 

After  this  we  were  invited  to  take  some  refresh- 
ment ;  and,  as  there  was  no  meat  to  be  obtained 
until  the  young  men  came  from  hunting,  cassava 
bread  was  set  before  us,  with  a  sauce  made  of  the 
casareep  or  boiled  cassava  juice,  to  which  a  quantity 
of  red  pepper  is  added.  I  had  frequently  partaken 
of  a  similar  sauce,  but  never  of  anything  equal  to 
that.  The  Caribs  ate  of  it  with  impunity ;  but  it  was 
sufficient  to  excoriate  the  mouth  of  any  other  person 
than  an  Indian, 

On  our  return  journey  the  Caribs  gradually  left  n;e, 


VISIT  TO  TllK  Ai'AW  Ul  ( >,->'.  1 3 (J 

each  remaining  at  liis  u\vn  scttk'HR-nt.  My  host 
having  gone  roiiiid  in  the  canoe,  I  liad  lo  walk  the 
last  stage  alone.  It  was  not  more  than  a  mile;  hut, 
being  tii'ed  and  very  footsore  from  having  worn  no 
shoes  that  day  on  account  of  swamps,  I  made  slow 
progress ;  and  at  length  wandered  from  the  path  in 
the  twilight,  and  found  myself  on  the  banks  of  a  little 
stream  which  I  had  not  before  seen.  The  prospect  of 
being  benighted,  alone  and  ^^•itllout  fire  or  weapons, 
in  a  district  so  infested  with  jaguars  as  the  Issororo, 
Avas  not  a  pleasant  one. 

While  doubting  whether  to  cross  the  rivulet  and 
push  on,  or  endeavour  in  the  dim  light  to  regain  the 
lost  path,  I  heard  a  loud  scream  at  some  little  distance. 
Concealed  by  a  projecting  bank  w^as  a  Carib  woman 
of  the  settlement  to  which  I  was  going,  who  had  just 
been  bathino-  her  children  for  the  nioht.  One  of  them 
had  rolled  down  the  steep  sandy  bank,  and  uttered 
the  cry  which  guided  me  to  lliem.  It  was  a  most 
providential  circumstance,  for  I  had  lost  the  track 
entirely,  but  was  now  safe. 

A  few  weeks  after  our  return  to  the  mission,  the 
Acawoio  family  from  Konosa  commenced  attendance 
there,  with  most  of  the   Caribs  from  Issororo. 

Near  the  sources  of  the  Pomeroon  there  were  some 
settlements  of  the  Acawoios,  whom  I  was  preparing  to 
visit,  though  with  little  hope  of  inducing  them  to 
attend  from  such  a  distance.  They  soon,  howevei", 
quitted  their  abode,  so  as  to  be  aljle  to  attend  the 
missions  on  the  Essequibo,  to  which  they  were  much 
nearer  than  to  ours.     Their  neighbours  informed  us 


140  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

of  this,  and  the  welcome  intelligence  prevented  our 
intended  visit. 

In  i^erson  and  stature  the  Acawoios  resemble  the 
other  tribes,  but  they  may  be  recognised  by  their 
peculiar  physiognomy,  and  the  manner  in  which  they 
contrive  to  adorn,  or  rather  disfigure,  their  features, 
which  are  not  unpleasing,  though  grave  and  some- 
what melancholy.  They  use  the  bright  red  of  the 
arnotto,  and  also  paint  their  faces  and  bodies  with  blue 
streaks,  in  which  they  take  great  pains.  They  wear  a 
piece  of  wood  or  a  quill  stuck  through  the  cartilage  of 
the  nose,  and  some  individuals  have  similar  ornaments 
through  the  lobe  of  the  ear.  They  formerly  distin- 
guished themselves  by  a  circular  hole,  about  half  an 
inch  in  diameter,  made  in  the  lower  part  of  the  under 
lip,  in  which  was  inserted  a  piece  of  wood  of  equal 
size  with  the  hole,  which  was  cut  ofi"  almost  even  with 
the  outer  skin,  the  inner  end  pressing  against  the  roots 
of  the  teeth.  This  latter  ornament  is  now  but  seldom 
seen,  but  the  others  are  general. 

The  ourali/  or  arrow  poison,  which  they  use  in 
common  with  other  tribes  of  the  interior  of  Guiana, 
is  now  well  known.  The  arrows  or  spikes  anointed 
with  it  are  made  of  the  cocorite  palm.  They  are 
usually  about  one  foot  in  length,  and  very  slender. 
One  end  is  sharpened  and  envenomed  with  the 
ourali :  and  around  the  other  is  wound  a  ball  or  tuft 
of  fleecy  cotton,  adapted  to  the  size  of  the  cavity  of 
the  blow-pipe,  through  which  it  is  to  be  discharged. 

^  Written  also  "  wourali,"  "  urali,"  ''  urari,"  "  curare,"  &c.,  ac- 
cording to  the  proiiunciation  of  the  various  tribes. 


VISIT  TO  THE  AC  A  U'OIOS.  1  1  1 

To  preserve  these  delicate  and  dangerous  spikes,  and 
to  guard  himself  from  the  death  which  a  slight  prick 
from  one  of  them  would  convey,  the  Indian  hunter 
makes  a  small  quiver  of  bamboo,  which  he  covers  with 
deer-skin  and  ornaments  with  cotton  strings.  To  this 
is  usually  attached  the  maxilla  (or  jaw  bone)  of  the 
fish  called  pirai.  This  is  used  for  partly  cutting  off 
the  poisoned  part  of  the  arrow,  which  is  done  by 
rapidly  turning  it  between  the  teeth  of  the  maxilla  : 
so  that  when  the  game  is  struck,  the  envenomed 
point  may  break  off  in  the  wound,  while  the  shaft, 
which  falls  on  the  ground,  can  Ije  recovered  by  the 
Indian,  sharpened,  and  poisoned  for  further  use. 

The  blow-pipe  is  a  reed,  or  small  palm,  about  nine 
feet  in  length,  which  is  hollowed  and  lined  with 
another  smooth  reed/  The  Indians  are  very  careful 
of  them,  and  frequently  turn  them  when  placed  in 
their  houses,  lest  they  should  become  in  the  slightest 
degree  bent  or  warped  by  remaining  in  one  position. 
They  sometimes  cover  them  with  handsome  "  pegall " 
work,  and  sell  them  as  curiosities  to  the  colonists. 

The  small  poisoned  arrows  are,  by  a  single  blast 
from  the  lungs,  sent  through  the  ca\'ity  of  the  reed, 
and  fly  for  some  distance  with  great  swiftness  and 
accurate  aim,  conveying  speedy  and  certain  death. 
The  tribes  wdiich  use  these  weapons  are  accustomed  to 
them  from  their  infancy,  and  by  long  practice  they 
acquire  a  degree  of  dexterity  which  is  inimitable  by 
strangers,  and  would  be  incredible,  were  it  not  for  the 

^  The  Arundinaria  Schomh>irf/kii.  a  single  iiiternodu  of  which  is 
sometimes  IG  feet  iu  length. 


142  THE  IlsDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

fact  tliat  they  depend  upon  them  for  most  of  their 
animal  food.  As  an  Indian  said  to  one  of  our  country- 
men, "The  blow -pipe  is  our  gun,  and  the  poisoned 
arrow  is  to  us  powder  and  shot." 

The  ourali  is  said  to  be  fatal  when  it  has  mixed 
with  the  blood  in  the  smallest  degree,  but  to  have  no 
poisonous  effect  on  an  unbroken  skin.  The  animals 
killed  with  it  appear  to  suffer  no  violent  pain,  though 
convulsions  occur  as  they  expire.  It  does  not  affect 
the  flesh,  which  is  perfectly  good  for  food.^ 

The  Macusis,  who  prepare  a  very  strong  kind,  use 
more  than  a  dozen  different  plants  in  its  composition. 
Of  these  the  only  ingredients  really  essential  seem 
to   be   the   bush-rope  which   contains   the  poisonous 

^  Some  of  tlie  Indians  wlio  prepare  tins  poison  affect  to  consider 
it  as  superior  to  gunpowder.  "I  know,"  said  an  old  poison  master 
to  Humboldt,  "  that  you  whites  can  make  soap,  and  prepare  the 
black  powder  which  has  the  defect  of  making  a  noise  while  killing 
animals.  But  this  poison  is  superior  to  anything  you  can  make. 
It  kills  silently,  so  that  no  one  knows  whence  the  stroke  comes." 

The  same  traveller  says  of  this  j)oison,  "  The  Otomacs  on  the 
Orinoco  frequently  poison  their  thumb-nails  with  the  curare.  The 
mere  impress  of  the  nail  proves  fatal,  should  it  mix  with  the  blood." 
He  procured  at  Esmeralda  specimens  of  the  poison  and  of  the  plant 
which  yields  it,  but  could  not  find  the  latter  in  blossom. 

He  states,  however,  that  more  than  forty  years  after,  it  was  dis- 
covered in  flower  on  the  banks  of  the  Pomeroon  and  Issororo,  by 
Eichard  Schomburgk.  That  traveller  visited  our  mission  district 
about  the  time  of  which  this  chapter  treats.  The  poison  is  not 
manufactured  there. 

"  Experiments  have  shown  that  the  ourali  does  not  belong  to  the 
class  of  tetanic  poisons,  and  that  it  especially  produces  a  cessation 
of  voluntary  muscular  movements,  whUe  the  functions  of  the  in- 
voluntary muscles,  as  the  heart  and  intestines,  remain  unimpaired." 
• — Humboldt's  Narrative  and  Views  of  Natwe. 


VISIT  TO  THE  ACAWOIOS.  I43 

principle,  and  a  kind  of  lily,  the  l>nll)  of  which  sup- 
plies the  thick  juice  which  gives  the  poison  the 
necessary  consistence. 

The  Acawoios  also  supply  the  coast  tribes  with 
considerable  quantities  of  the  haiarri  root,  which  is 
used  in  poisoning  fish.  These  roots  arc  usually  cut 
in  pieces  of  about  two  feet  in  length,  and  tied  up  in 
small  bundles,  which  have  a  powerful  and  disagreeal3le 
scent.  Some  of  these  pieces,  bruised  till  the  fibres 
separate,  and  then  washed  in  an  inclosed  piece  of 
water ;  or  in  a  small  stream,  at  the  turn  of  the  tide, 
when  tliere  is  little  or  no  current,  will  cause  the  fish 
to  rise  to  the  surface  apparently  intoxicated  and 
gasping.  In  a  few  minutes  they  float  motionless,  and 
the  larger  kinds  are  sliot  with  barbed  arrows,  while 
the  smaller  ones  are  struck  with  knives  previously  to 
their  beino:  takino;  out  of  the  water.  This  is  done  to 
save  trouble,  as  they  might  revive  if  a  hea\y  shower 
of  rain  were  suddenly  to  fall,  or  fresh  water  to  reach 
them.  The  fish  so  taken  are  perfectly  wholesome ; 
— perhaps  the  action  of  fire  has  some  effect  in  de- 
stropng  any  noxious  quality  which  these  poisons  may 
possess,  as  in  the  well-kno^^^l  instance  of  the  juice  of 
the  cassava. 

The  Acawoios  also  carry  on  a  traffic  in  many  otlicr 
things  ;  and  they  have  been  called,  from  their  roving 
propensities,  the  pedlars  and  news-cari'iers  of  the  north- 
eastern coast.  They  are  in  constant  communication 
with  the  inhabitants  of  Venezuela  and  the  Brazils,  as 
well  as  with  the  colonists  of  Demerara,  Surinam,  and 
Cayenne. 


144  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

Notwithstanding  this  roving  disposition,  they  are 
attentive  to  agriculture,  and  are  said  to  cultivate  more 
land  than  any  other  tribe  ;  that  they  may  have  not" 
only  a  supply  of  provisions  for  themselves,  but  for  any 
other  party  who  may  chance  to  call,  the  rules  of  hospi- 
tality being  strictly  observed.  But  after  they  have 
planted  their  fields,  and  prepared  their  warlike  imple- 
ments, they  sell  whatever  articles  they  may  have  on 
hand,  and  with  a  supply  of  English  goods,  and  as 
many  fire-arms  as  they  can  muster,  set  off  to  the 
Venezuelan  or  Brazilian  territories  to  barter  them 
there  for  other  articles.  Of  the  nature  of  those 
journeys  through  the  wilds  of  the  interior,  the  follow- 
ing account  has  been  given  by  one  who  was  well 
acquainted  with  the  habits  of  this  tribe  : '  — 

"In  these  expeditions,  in  which  several  families  join, 
their  chief  care  is  to  provide  a  good  stock  of  bread  : 
they  then  march  for  three  days,  and  halt  for  two, 
during  which  they  hunt,  and  barbacote  or  dry  their 
game  ;  and  they  are  in  no  distress  for  provisions,  for 
even  two  or  three  months,  which  is  frequently  the 
duration  of  their  journeys. 

"  In  these  marches,  when  they  approach  a  village, 
it  signifies  not  of  what  nation,  they  prepare  to  attack 
it.  If  it  be  on  the  alert,  and  strong  enough  to  resist, 
they  conclude  a  treaty  of  commerce,  eat  together,  and 
trade,  without  reserve  or  suspicion;  but  if  the  place 
be  weak,  and  the  inhabitants  off  their  guard,  those 
who  resist  are  instantly  massacred,  and  the  remainder 
become  slaves  to  the  victors. 

1  ]\rr.  ITillhouse, 


VISIT  TO  THE  Arj  IVOIOS.         ■  '  1  .IT) 

"  Their  audacity  in  these  predatory  excursions  is 
astonishing.  If  a  pnrty  can  uuister  eight  or  ten 
stand  of  fire-arms,  it  will  fight  its  way  through  all 
the  mountain  tribes,  though  at  open  war  with  tliem, 
and  by  the  rapidity  of  their  marches,  nnd  niglitly  en- 
terprises, they  conceal  the  weakness  of  their  numbers, 
and  carry  terror  before   them/' ^ 

Soon  after  my  journey  to  the  Acawoio  settlement, 
the  Caribi  territory  through  which  I  had  passed  was 
ravaged  by  the  small-pox.  Its  neat  and  flourishing 
"sdllages  became  the  scenes  of  death  nnd  misery. 

Many  sad  tales  were  told  respecting  this  visitation. 
At  one  settlement,  where  many  had  died,  a  young 
stranger,  when  stricken  with  the  disease,  had  been 
left  to  perish ;  none  daring  to  approach  him  with  a 
draught  of  water.  It  was  said  that  at  another  place 
fire  had  been  set  to  a  house,  that  a  corpse  within. 
It  might  be  therewith   consumed. 

At  my  own  settlement  the  small-pox  attacked  the 
negro  family,  which  by  other  arrivals  now  numbered 
sixteen.  The  school  was  for  a  time  broken  up,  and 
the  Indians  warned  to  avoid  the  place.  But  my 
Arawak  boy,  Ifili  (or  David),  positively  refused  to 
leave  me.  He  remained  while  the  small-pox  suc- 
cessively attacked  every  individual  at  the  settlement 
with  me  except  himself. 

The  destructive  sweep  of  this  disease  overcame  the  re- 
luctance of  the  Indians  to  use  the  remedies  of  civilized 
man  ;  and  many  of  them  consented  to  be  vaccinated. 

^  Fur  a  furUicr  account  of  the  Acawoio  or  KapoLn  race,  see 
Part  II.  cLap.  v.  &c. 

L 


14G  THE  INDIAN  TBIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

When  the  small-pox  had  passed  away  the  Indian 
congregation  increased.  Our  chapel  had  been  en- 
larged and  beantified  by  the  addition  of  a  chancel, 
porch,  and  belfry,  and  the  whole  was  raised  on  stout 
blocks  of  timber.  We  frequently  had  therein  people 
of  six  different  languages — the  English,  Creole-Dutch, 
Arawak,  Caribi,  Acawoio,  and  Warau,  individuals  of 
the  latter  degraded  tribe  being  sometimes  brought  by 
the  others.  They  could  at  first  scarcely  be  prevented 
from  getting  in  and  out  at  the  windows.  Sometimes 
one  would  place  himself  on  the  window-sill,  and  squat- 
ting on  his  heels,  rest  his  elbows  on  his  knees,  and  his 
jaw  on  both  hands,  and  quietly,  with  gaping  mouth, 
and  somewhat  vacant  look,  observe  what  was  going 
on.  But,  however  motley  and  uncouth  our  asseml^ly, 
it  was  satisfactory  to  see  that  the  once  wretched  build- 
ing was  fast  becoming  the  house  of  prayer  for  all  the 
tribes  around. 


H': 


CHAPTER  IX. 

WAKAPOA    LAKE    AND    ITS    NEIGHBOURHOOD. 

Expedition  to  ^lauawarin  and  "Wakapoa — Its  Results — Maqiiani 
Dance  of  the  Arawaks — Ditticulties — "Captain  Peter's  ("luireh  " 
Mosquitoes. 

To  the  westward  of  the  Pomeroon  there  are  several 
fiue  htkes,  or  "  wet "  savannahs,  as  they  are  called. 
One  of  these  has  been  already  mentioned.  A  larger 
one,  called  AVakapoa,  is  situated  a  few  miles'  distance 
from  the  river's  mouth.  Their  borders  were  inhabited 
by  Indians  of  the  Arawak  nation. 

On  the  banks  of  the  Pomeroon  itself,  and  at  no  great 
distance  from  the  Wakapoa,  there  were  several  planta- . 
tions,  on  which  provisions  were  cultivated  by  a  popu- 
lation of  about  300  labourers,  chiefly  of  African  origin. 

In  the  beginnincr  of  1842  Mr.  W.  T.  Smithett  ar- 
rived  as  lay  reader  of  that  district,  and  it  was  soon 
arranged  that  we  should  in  company  visit  the  heathen 
Arawaks  of  the  Wakapoa,  and  take  with  us  Cor- 
nelius and  his  brother-in-law  Thomas,  as  paddlers 
and  interpreters. 

While  we  were  embarking  at  the  landing-place  of 
one  of  the  plantations,  called  Caledonia,  an  Indian 
canoe  drew  near.      In  it  was  an  old  chief,  named  John 

L  '2 


148  THE  INDIAN  TBIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

"VVanyawai,  tlie  head  of  tlie  Caribs  in  a  more  distant 
river,  tlie  Manawarin.  Learning  our  object,  tbe  old 
man  said  that  he  would  be  glad  of  a  visit  from  us. 
This  seemed  an  opening  for  Christianity  in  a  still 
wilder  and  more  distant  territory.  We  therefore 
resolved  to  accompany  him  first  to  his  settlement, 
though  ill  prepared  (our  canoe  being  too  small  for 
such  an  expedition)  ;  and  to  visit  the  AVakapoa  on 
our  return. 

It  was  necessary  to  descend  the  river,  and  go  on  the 
sea  for  four  or  five  miles.     A  dense  mangrove  forest 

o 

borders  the  river's  mouth,  and  there  the  manati,  or 
sea-cow,  is  often  met  with.  This  creature  is  of  great 
length,  very  thick,  and  clumsy  in  shape.  It  some- 
times raises  its  blunt  head  out  of  the  water,  and 
feeds  on  the  herbage  which  grows  on  the  banks ;  sup- 
porting its  body  on  two  strong  pectoral  fins,  which 
the  female  also  uses  in  holding  her  young.  Its  tail 
is  flat,  and  of  a  circular  shape.  Though  very  large, 
it  is  quiet  and  timid,  and  its  flesh  is  good  food. 

The  estuary  or  bay  which  extends  between  the 
Pomeroon  and  Moruca  was  crossed  without  difliculty, 
the  day  being  fine.  Near  the  mouth  of  the  latter 
stream  we  saw  a  number  of  wooden  piles  standing  in 
the  sea,  the  remains  of  an  old  Dutch  fortification. 
The  Spaniards  attacked  this  post  in  1797,  but  were 
repulsed  with  severe  loss.  Their  vessels  grounded  on 
the  mud  flat,  and  were  disabled  by  the  fire  of  the 
garrison.  An  old  coloured  man  who  saw  the  fight, 
described  to  me  the  Spanish  crew  of  a  burning 
vessel   as  struo^olino;  throuG;h  the   "  drift  mud  "  to  iho 


WAKAPOA  LAKE.  14«J 

shore,  with  white  cloths  bound  round  their  heads  as  a 
token  of  surrender.  On  the  opposite  bank  cannon- 
balls  have  been  found,  tlie  relics  of  that  engagement : 
but  the  fort,  and  the  land  on  which  it  stood,  have 
long  since  disappeared.  In  the  estuary  shai-ks  and 
saw-fish  are  often  seen.' 

The  Moruca  is  a  narrow  stream  of  no  oreat  lenuth. 
It  is,  however,  valuable  as  afi'ording  an  inland  water 
communication  with  the  Orinoco,  by  way  of  the 
Waini  and  Barima. 

A  number  of  Venezuelans,  of  the  mixed  race  called 
Spanish  Ai-awaks,  having  some  years  before  sought 
refuge  from  revolutionary  horrors  within  our  boun- 
daries, had  settled  on  the  Moruca.  They  Avere,  of 
course,   members   of  the   Church  of  Eomc.     At  the 

1  Tlie  saw-fisli  is  sometimes  found  twenty  feet  in  length.  Its 
"  saw  "  resembles  tlie  elongated  snout  of  the  sword-fisli,  with  tlio 
addition  of  a  row  of  formidable  teeth  on  each  side  along  its  edges. 
As  these  cause  it  to  resemble  a  comb  more  than  a  saw,  the  negroes 
call  it  the  "  comb-fish."  Large  specimens  of  those  creatures  may 
sometimes  be  seen  with  theii"  dorsal  fins  just  visible  above  the 
surface.  They  are  dangerous  to  approach,  and  if  molested  turn 
savagely  on  the  assailant.  A  young  man,  Avhom  I  knew,  having 
discharged  an  arrow  at  one,  it  immediately  attacked  and  bruke  his 
small  canoe,  striking  right  and  left  with  its  formidable  weapon,  and 
killing  his  dog  which  was  sitting  in  the  bow.  The  young  man 
himself  escaped  from  the  stern  into  a  large  Warau  canoe,  which 
was  fortunately  in  company. 

Some  years  after  the  above  incident,  while  crossing  the  same 
spot  with  the  Eev.  "W.  G.  G.  Austin,  we  disturbed  one  of  thote 
creatures,  which  was  apparently  taking  its  siesta  at  the  rippling 
surface  in  the  beat  of  the  day.  It  swam  SAviftly  round  us  for  a 
considerable  time,  evidently  angry  and  desirous  to  attack,  but 
deterred  by  the  size  of  our  boat  and  the  stroke  of  its  eight 
paddles. 


150  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

time  we  visited  the  river,  a  station  called  Santa 
Eosa  had  recently  been  established  there,  and  the 
Eev.  J.  Cullen,  who  remained  with  them  more  than 
fourteen  years,  was  their  padre. 

We  did  not  enter  their  district,  but  left  it  on  the 
right  hand.  Our  object  was  to  penetrate  the  wide- 
spreading  heathen  country  which  no  Christian  teacher 
had  ever  visited.  We  therefore  turned  up  the  Mana- 
warin,  which,  though  called  a  tributary,  is  larger  than 
the  Moruca  itself. 

We  had  to  take  up  our  quarters  for  the  night  on 
the  banks  of  the  Manawarin,  and  after  prayers 
endeavoured  to  compose  ourselves  to  sleep.  Our 
shelter  was  imperfect,  consisting  of  a  small  flat  roof 
of  manicole  leaves,  just  sufficient  to  cover  two  ham- 
mocks. The  Indians  made  large  fires,  and  suspended 
their  hammocks  over  them  between  the  trees.  This 
is  the  best  protection  from  the  wild  animals  and 
reptiles  which  abound  in  that  dense  forest,  A  loud 
splash  was  occasionally  heard  in  the  water,  which 
the  Indians  said  was  occasioned  by  the  plunging  of 
an  alligator. 

About  midnight  it  began  to  rain  heavily,  and  the 
water  which  dripped  through  the  roof  compelled  me 
to  rise,  and  stand  till  morning.  The  Indians  were 
likewise  wet,  and  with  difficulty  managed  to  shelter 
one  of  the  fires,  so  as  to  keep  it  from  being  extin- 
guished. The  sound  of  the  heavy  dropping  of  the 
rain  from  the  leaves  and  branches  was  only  varied 
by  the  occasional  falling  of  some  large  seed-pod  from 
the  tall  trees.     All  seemed  uncomfortable,  except  my 


WAKAPOA  LAKE.  151 

friend,  ^Yllo  still  slept  on,  and  Thomas,  who  had  con- 
trived to  fix  one  of  our  umbrellas  over  his  hammock 
so  as  to  keep  his  body  pretty  dry,  A  little  negro 
boy  had  been  admitted  to  share  this  shelter,  and  lay 
in  the  hammock  fast  asleep,  with  his  black  woolly 
head  on  the  red  bosom  of  the  good-natured  Indian. 

The  next  day  we  passed  through  a  district  in- 
habited by  about  one  hundred  Waraus,  several  of 
whom  we  visited.  They  listened  with  perfect  in- 
difference to  all  we  said,  and  were  most  importunate 
beo;o;ars. 

Very  different  was  the  reception  we  experienced 
at  the  dwelling  of  the  old  Caribi  chief,  who  seemed 
to  consider  our  visit  as  a  great  honour.  He  intro- 
duced us  to  his  two  sons,  and  to  several  of  his  tribe, 
promising  to  use  all  his  influence  to  induce  them  to 
listen  to  Christian  teaching.  He  would  doubtless 
have  done  so  had  he  lived ;  but  the  hand  of  death 
was  even  then  overshadowing  himself  and  his  people. 
The  small-])ox  soon  came  upon  them,  and  destroyed 
many,  dispersing  the  survivors  in  terror  all  over 
the  country  for  a  time. 

At  a  AVarau  settlement  which  we  visited,  we  found 
a  poor  girl  who  had  been  dreadfully  burnt  some 
time  before,  the  fire  having  caught  her  hammock 
while  she  slept.  She  was  in  a  shocking  state,  and 
it  was  evident  that  the  Indian  remedies  were  only 
increasing  her  sufferings.  We  offered  to  procure 
medical  assistance,  if  her  family  would  remove  her 
to  the  coast.  She  seemed  a  7ery  meek  and  patient 
child,   and  her  look  of  gratitude   f(^r   our  sympatliy 


152  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

was  most  affecting.  Her  friends,  however,  took  no 
trouble  about  her,  and  she  probably  died  soon 
after. 

On  our  return,  being  anxious  to  reach  our  stations 
before  the  Sabbath,  we  ventured  to  cross  the  sea 
soon  after  midnight,  the  weather  being  fine,  though 
the  night  was  dark.  Our  small  canoe,  however,  met 
with  heavier  waves  than  we  had  expected,  which  in 
the  darkness  we  could  not  avoid.  Paddling  and 
baling  in  the  gloom,  we  were  thankful  to  reach  the 
Pomeroon  in  safety,  though  wet  with  the  sea-water, 
and  waited  shivering  till  daylight  enabled  us  to 
ascend  the  Wakapoa.  Accidents  frequently  occur  on 
the  sea  at  that  place.  A  few  months  later,  a  canoe 
much  largei:  than  ours  was  swamped,  and  a  settler 
named  Stoll,  and  several  Indians,  were  drowned, 
while  attempting  to  cross  it  during  the  night. 

The  entrance  to  the  AVakapoa  is  very  narrow,  but 
after  proceeding  a  few  miles,  through  many  impedi- 
ments from  trees,  which  have  fallen  from  the  banks 
into  the  stream,  and  remain  fixed  by  their  branches 
to  the  bottom,  we  at  length  reached  a  scene  of 
great  beauty,  having  an  extensive  prospect  across 
a  savannah.  Through  this  flows  a  deep  stream, 
which,  overflowing  its  banks  during  many  months 
of  the  year,  forms  a  beautiful  lake,  adorned  with 
clumps  of  the  ita  palm,  and  several  islands.  A 
similar  stream  enters  it  from  a  savannah  on  the 
right  hand,   called  Koraia. 

Having  ascended  the  Wakapoa,  we  went  direct  to 
the  habitation  of  the  chief  of  the  district,  an  infirm 


WAKAPOA  LAKE.  153 

old  Arawak  uamed  Sabaiko.  After  such  reniaiks  as 
my  limited  ac(i[uaintance  with  their  language  enabled 
me  to  make  (the  old  man  understanding  only  a  word 
or  two  of  English),  Cornelius  addressed  him.  He 
was  the  most  eloquent  speaker  I  have  known  among 
the  Indians ;  and  we  listened  with  silence  and  plea- 
sure to  his  words.  The  old  man  seemed  moved, 
and  promised  to  tell  his  people  when  they  returned, 
most  of  them  being  absent.  We  left  him,  after 
prayer,  according  to  our  custom,  and  returned  to 
our  stations. 

Our  visit  to  Wakapoa  having  apparently  pro- 
duced no  good  effect,  we  repeated  it  after  some  weeks, 
but  with  similar  results.  On  this  occasion  the  old 
chief's  w^ife  made  her  appearance  with  what  seemed 
at  a  distance  to  be  a  singular  head-dress  ;  Ijut  jjroved 
to  be  a  young  baboon  or  red  monkey,  which  she 
carried  in  this  manner,  its  feet  being  placed  on  her 
shoulders,  and  its  orinuiiio-  visaoe  resting-  on  its  fore- 
paws  upon  her  forehead.  The  Indian  women  take 
great  care  of  various  young  animals,  even  suckling 
them  as  if  they  were  their  children.  This  disgusting 
practice  is  not  confined  to  any  one  tribe,  nor  indeed 
to  the  Indian  females  alone. 

We  visited  this  district  many  times,  but  with  little 
good  effect.  Most  of  the  young  men  of  the  different 
settlements  had  been  engaged  to  accompany  the 
military  expedition  to  Tirara,  and  returned  much 
worse  disposed  than  they  were  before.  Some  families 
were  there  who  had  lived  on  the  Demerara,  and  were 
remarkable  for  drunkenness. 


154  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

On  one  occasion  I  visited  tlie  Wakapoa  alone,  Mr. 
Smithett  being  prevented  from  going  by  indisposition. 
On  arriving  tliere,  I  found  that  the  people  had  all 
gone  to  the  Koraia,  where  there  was  a  great  Maquarri 
dance.  We  arrived  at  the  place  of  festivity  in  the 
afternoon,  being  guided  by  the  shouts  of  the  people 
there  assembled. 

The  scene  surpassed  all  that  I  had  previously  heard 
or  seen  of  Indian  life.  The  young  men  and  boys, 
fantastically  adorned,  were  ranged  in  two  parallel 
rows,  facing  each  other,  each  holding  in  his  right  hand 
the  Maquarri  from  which  the  dance  takes  its  name. 

The  Macpiarri  is  a  whip,  more  than  three  feet  long, 
and  capable  of  giving  a  severe  cut,  as  their  bleeding 
legs  amply  testified.  They  waved  those  whips  in 
their  hands  as  they  danced,  uttering  alternate  cries, 
which  resembled  the  note  of  a  certain  bird  often  heard 
in  the  forests.  At  some  little  distance  from  the 
dancers  were  couples  of  men  lashing  each  other  on 
the  leg.  The  man  whose  turn  it  was  to  receive 
the  lash  stood  firmly  on  one  leg,  advancing  the  other ; 
while  his  adversary,  stooping,  took  deliberate  aim, 
and,  springing  from  the  earth  to  add  vigour  to  his 
stroke,  gave  his  opponent  a  severe  cut.  The  latter 
gave  no  other  sign  that  he  was  hurt  than  by  a  con- 
temptuous smile,  though  blood  might  have  been 
drawn  by  the  lash,  which,  after  a  short  dance,  was 
returned  with  equal  force.  Nothing  could  exceed  the 
good  humour  with  which  those  proceedings  were 
carried  on.  Every  man,  unless  aged  or  infirm,  is 
expected  to  engage  in  the  contest.       One  of  them  was 


WAKAFOA  LAKE.  155 

scarcely  able  to  walk  from  tlie  punisliment  he  had 
received ;  but  in  general,  after  a  few  lashes,  they 
drank  paiwari  together,  and  returned  to  the  main 
body  of  the  dancers,  from  which  fresh  couples  were 
continually  falling  out  to  test  each  others'  mettle. 

The  old  chief,  Sabaiko,  met  and  saluted  me  in  a 
friendly  manner;  and  then  seated  himself  in  the 
house  to  view  the  proceedings  of*  his  people.  He  was 
dressed  for  the  occasion  in  European  clothing,  had  sus- 
pended round  his  neck  the  silver  plate  which  marked 
his  chieftainship,  and  bore  his  silver-headed  staff  in 
his  hand.  Some  of  his  people  wore  shirts,  &c.  which 
contrasted  in  a  singular  manner  with  the  ornaments 
of  their  native  costume.  I  am  sorry  to  add  that  most 
of  them  were  in  different  stages  of  intoxication. 

Some  time  before  the  whip  dance  ended,  a  sturdy 
little  Warau,  in  an  e\dl  hour  for  his  legs,  arrived  from 
a  neighbouring  settlement.  The  young  Arawaks 
thought,  and  probably  with  justice,  that  he  had  pur- 
posely delayed  his  coming  until  the  close  of  the 
proceedings,  in  the  hope  of  avoiding  the  lash  while 
getting  a  share  of  the  liquor.  They  therefore  quietly 
passed  the  word  among  themselves  to  keep  him  em- 
ployed, by  challenging  in  succession ;  and  the  grim 
joke  W'as  carried  into  effect.  In  a  corner  of  the 
ground  near  me  the  poor  fellow  was  kept  engaged  with 
fresh  antagonists,  giving  and  receiving  the  cuts  of 
the  Maquarri.  He  bore  it  with  unflinching  fortitude, 
though,  as  he  at  last  perceived  their  design,  there 
became  an  evident  difference  between  his  demeanour 
and  theirs;  especially  in  the  nature  of  the  grins  with 


153  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

which  the  lash  was  welcomed,  and  the  capers  which 
preceded  and  followed  it.  They  let  him  off  at  last, 
but  his  small  share  of  paiwari  had  been  very  dearly 
earned. 

The  dance  was  given  in  honour  of  a  deceased 
female,  who  had  been  buried  in  the  house.  A  broad 
plank  lay  on  her  grave,  and  on  it  were  placed  two 
bundles,  containing  *  the  refuse  of  the  silk  grass  of 
which  the  whips  were  made,  which  had  been  carefully 
preserved  ; — there  were  also  two  pieces  of  wood,  rudely 
carved  to  resemble  birds,  and  two  others  which  were 
intended  to  represent  infants.  At  a  signal  from  the 
master  of  the  house  the  dancing  ceased ;  and  all  the 
men,  arranging  themselves  in  procession,  Avent  round 
the  house  with  slow  and  measured  steps,  the  plank 
and  wooden  images  being  carried  before  them.  After 
this  they  arranged  themselves  near  the  grave,  and  one 
of  them  chanted  something  in  a  low  voice,  to  which 
the  others  answered  at  intervals  with  four  moans,  by 
way  of  chorus.  The  articles  carried  in  procession 
were  then  taken  to  a  hole  previously  dug  in  the  earth, 
and  buried  there.  Two  or  three  men  appointed  for 
the  purpose  then  drew  forth  their  long  knives,  and, 
rushing  in  among  the  dancers,  snatched  the  whips  from 
them,  cut  off  the  lash  from  each,  and  buried  them  with 
the  other  articles.  It  seemed  to  be  a  poiut  of  etiquette 
not  to  resign  the  whips  without  a  struggle,  and,  while 
the  one  party  were  snatching  and  cutting,  the  others 
were  leaping  and  throwing  somersaults  to  avoid  them, 
and  it  was  surprising  that  none  of  them  received  any 
injury  amid  the  confusion. 


WAKAPOA   LAKE.  157 

After  an  interval  of  rest,  twelve  of  tlie  young  men 
came  forward  to  engage  in  another  kind  of  dance, 
called  Owiarri.  These  performers  carried  rods  about 
twelve  feet  in  length,  on  the  top  of  which  were  fixed 
small  gourds  with  stones  in  them,  and  decorated  with 
streamers  of  silk  grass,  painted  red.  They  ranged 
themselves  in  parallel  rows  as  before,  facing  each 
other :  and  danced  backwards  and  forwards,  striking 
the  lower  ends  of  their  rods  upon  the  earth,  and 
keeping  time  with  the  clash.  Some  young  women 
went  up  to  these  dancers  from  time  to  time,  and 
taking  them  by  the  arm  danced  with  them ;  then  at 
a  signal  given  by  their  partners,  who  shook  the 
coverings  of  beetles'  wings  and  other  ornaments  with 
which  their  legs  were  adorned,  they  ran  off  to  their 
companions  like  frightened  deer. 

Two  canoes  full  of  paiw\ari  had  been  made  for  the 
occasion,  and  as  these  were  now  exhausted  the  sj^irits 
of  the  company  began  to  flag.  I  slept  at  the  house  of 
a  young  Indian  named  Hubbard,  at  some  little  dis- 
tance from  the  scene  of  the  revels.  The  noise  of  the 
drunken  orgies  by  degrees  died  away,  the  moon  rose 
in  all  the  soft  beauty  of  a  tropical  night,  and  the 
stillness  which  pervaded  all  nature  formed  a  striking 
contrast  to  the  noise  and  turbulence  which  had 
marked  the  day. 

The  next  day,  the  visitors  from  the  Wakaj)oa  arose 
early  and  went  to  their  canoes,  to  avoid  meeting  me. 
On  sending  a  request  for  them  to  return,  they  replied 
"  that  if  I  wished  to  speak  with  them  I  jnust  go  to 
them."     On  hastening  to  the  water-side,  I  found  about 


158  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

fifty  people  present,  who  were  all  seated  in  their 
canoes  about  to  start ;  and  when  I  spoke  to  them 
they  listened  in  gloomy  silence,  and  without  turning 
their  heads  towards  me.  Sabaiko  then  said,  "  I  have 
no  power  over  my  people  ;  myself  and  a  few  will 
hear,  but  most  of  them  are  unwilling." 

Eeturning  to  the  scene  of  the  preceding  day's 
festivity  I  found  that  headaches  and  sore  legs  were 
abundant,  and  received  many  applications  for  re- 
medies. Under  the  influence  of  present  feelings,  some 
of  them  said  that  their  dances  were  very  bad,  and 
that  they  would  forsake  them,  and  put  themselves 
under  Mr.  Smithett's  instructions ; — ^good  resolutions, 
which  with  most  abated  as  their  headaches  went  off" 
and  their  legs  became  well. 

The  Maquarri  dances  had  often  been  mentioned  to 
me,  but,  as  our  own  people  had  discontinued  them,  I 
had  given  up  all  expectation  of  witnessing  one.  I 
was  particularly  surprised  at  their  indifference  to  pain, 
which  they  said  was  owing  in  a  great  measure  to  the 
paiAvari  and  the  presence  of  the  women,  who  sit  by 
as  spectators  of  their  powers  of  endurance.  This 
entertainment  had  been  given  by  one  of  the  men  in 
honour  of  his  sister,  who  had  been  dead  many  months  ; 
her  husband  was  present,  and  I  was  told  that,  after 
the  dance,  his  connexion  with  her  family  would 
entirely  cease.  Some  have  supposed  that  those  dances 
were  connected  with  the  giving  in  marriage  of  some 
young  female,  and  that  contending  rivals  settled  their 
claims  with  the  Maquarri  ;  but  this  I  am  unable 
to  decide,  though  it  is  not  exclusively  a  funeral  game. 


WJKAP(>A   LAKE.  1  -)1» 

AVith  respect  to  the  images  I  could  learn  uothing  : 
tliey  were  ceremonies  derived  from  their  ancestors, 
but  they  seemed  to  have  lost  their  original  mcan- 
iug.i 

During  the  year  1842  and  the  early  part  of 
1843,  Mr.  Smithett  and  myself  repeatedly  visited  the 
Wakapoa  and  Koraia.  On  one  occasion,  being  unable 
to  discover  the  path  leading  to  their  settlements, 
we  attempted  to  cross  the  swamp,  and  found  our- 
selves in  an  unpleasant  position  :  the  crust  of  the 
quagmire,  which  was  hardened  by  the  sun,  being 
in  most  places  strong  enough  to  bear  our  weio-ht, 
but  in  some  parts  very  thin,  and  giving  way  beneath 
om-  feet.  We  at  length  sunk  deep  at  every  step,  and 
T  received  a  wound  in  the  sole  of  my  foot,  by  a 
splinter  from  a  tree  which  was  imljedded  beneath 
the  surface.  This  confined  me  to  my  hammock  for 
two  days.  Mr.  Smithett  got  safely  across,  though 
he  sunk  in  the  mud  very  deeply  at  one  spot.  On 
our  return  the  Indians  made  a  path  for  us  across 
the  swamp  by  a  layer  of  the  large  trooly-leaves, 
which  was  perfectly  safe. 

^  I  have  not  seen  among  otlier  tribes  anything  similar  to  the 
Maqnarri,  the  institution  of  which  seems  to  bear  a  faint  resemblance 
to  the  funeral  games  of  classic  antiquity.  It  is  also  the  nearest 
approach,  observable  among  the  Indians,  to  tlie  friendly  contests 
practised  in  Europe  during  the  ages  of  chivalry.  Though  suffi- 
ciently barbarous,  it  is  by  no  means  to  be  compared  to  our  own 
brutal  prize-fights,  or  to  pugilistic  contests  in  general.  And  it 
would  be  a  great  benefit  to  the  obstinate  duellists  of  Europe  and 
America,  and  especially  to  their  unfortunate  families,  were  the 
Maquarri  to  supersede  among  them  the  use  of  sword  and  pistol, 
rifle  and  bowie-knife. 


160  THE  INDIAN  TBIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

In  returning,  we  saw  a  young  alligator  asleep  on 
tlie  surface  of  tlie  water,  wliicli  one  of  our  Indians 
struck  witli  a  paddle,  and  placed  in  the  hinder  part 
of  the  canoe,  thinking  it  to  be  dead.  It  soon  revived, 
and,  as  it  began  to  move,  the  two  lads  who  were 
sitting  on  the  seat  just  over  it,  nearly  overturned  us 
in  their  hurry  to  escape.  Having  its  head  towards 
the  pointed  stern,  it  began  to  move  up  towards  the 
steersman,  who  hastily  threw  a  foot  over  each  side  of 
the  canoe,  and  was  preparing  to  slip  backward  into 
the  stream,  when  the  alligator,  instinctively  perceiving 
that  by  ascending  it  would  not  find  water,  turned 
round,  and  began  to  run  forwards.  Its  skull  was 
then  fractured  by  a  blow  from  the  blade  of  a  jDaddle, 
which  prevented  the  reptile  doing  further  mischief. 

On  another  occasion,  while  descending  the  narrow 
gorge  or  outlet  of  the  Wakapoa,  we  were  carried 
by  the  velocity  of  the  current  upon  one  of  those 
dangerous  stumps  (called  snags  on  the  rivers  of 
the  United  States),  which  brought  us  up  with  great 
violence ;  and  the  canoe,  after  quivering  for  a  few 
seconds,  fell  broadside  into  the  water.  She  provi- 
dentially righted,  but  was  half  full,  and  we  were 
in  a  state  of  great  anxiety  lest  the  bottom  should 
have  been  pierced  :  that,  however,  was  not  the  case, 
or  the  consequences,  in  that  obstructed  rapid,  might 
have  been  fatal  to  us. 

Mr.  Smithett,  who  was  most  indefatigable  in  his 
labours,  succeeded,  during  a  visit  of  nine  days,  in 
inducing  about  thirty  Indians  to  commence  attend- 
ance at  Caledonia :    and  there  was  at  length   every 


tf^AKAPOA  LAKE.  161 

prospect  of  success  following  much  disappointment, 
among  the  Ai-awaks  of  the  Wakapoa. 

In  the  Manawarin,  among  the  Caribs,  the  prospect 
was  even  more  cheering.  The  old  chief,  John 
Wanyawai,  had  indeed,  to  our  regret,  died  of  small- 
pox wdth  many  of  his  family  and  people.  But  one 
of  his  sons,  named  Peter,  had  recovered  from  the 
disease,  and  succeeded  to  his  father's  office.  His 
first  act  was  to  assemble  all  the  Caribs  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood ;  who,  at  the  suggestion  of  Mr.  M'Clintock, 
the  Post-holder,  constructed  a  large  shed  on  a  hill 
called  AVasiba ;  to  be  used  as  a  place  of  worship 
when  the  missionaries  might  visit  their  river.  This 
building  was  used  for  that  purpose  more  than  once, 
both  by  Mr.  Smithett  and  myself;  and  was  known 
among  the  Indians  by  the  name  of  "  Captain  Peter's 
Church."  More  than  one  hundred  Caribs  sometimes 
assembled  there. 

The  gTcat  drawback  to  the  formation  of  an  Indian 
station  at  Hackney,  Caledonia,  or  the  neighbouring 
estates,  was  the  annoyance  experienced  from  the 
mosquitoes,  for  which  that  district  is  notorious ;  and 
which  are  numerous  and  tormenting  to  a  degree 
which,  without  experience,  can  scarcely  be  compre- 
hended. The  negroes  and  others  fill  their  houses 
with  smoke  in  the  evenings,  to  drive  them  out ;  a 
remedy  almost  as  bad  as  the  evil  which  it  is  de- 
signed to  counteract.  The  Indians  avoid  fixing 
their  habitations  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  sea, 
where  those  insects  are  most  abundant.^ 

^  The  evenings  and  nights  of  Guiana  are  generally  very  pleasant 

M 


162  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

Notwithstanding  tliis,  the  Arawaks  from  the 
Wakapoa,  and  occasionally  a  few  Caribs  from  Mana- 
warin,  endm^ed  this  annoyance  for  one  or  two  nights 
in  the  week,  taking  shelter  among  the  negroes,  or 
in  any  shed  which  they  could  find  vacant. 

on  the  biglier  land,  remote  from  the  coast.  There,  as  a  friendly- 
visitor  beneath  the  humble  roof  of  the  Indian,  you  can,  after  a  hot 
and  fatiguing  voyage,  peacefully  recline  in  your  hammock,  enjoy 
the  cool  night  air,  and  watch  the  bright  moon  or  stars  ;  while  the 
goat-sucker,  flitting  from  stump  to  stump  of  the  field  or  clearing, 
will  amuse  you  with  his  cry,  which  strangely  resembles  the  human 
voice.  One  of  those  weird  birds  in  a  shriU.  inquiring  tone  asks, 
"Who  are  you?"  which  question  will  be  repeated  by  a  second 
(and  perhaps  a  third)  at  some  distance.  Other  kinds  will  per- 
emptorily request  you  to  "Work,  work,  work  away!"  or  to  "Whip 
poor  AVill ! "  If  the  night  air  be  too  cold,  your  kind  host  will 
place  more  wood  on  the  fire,  and  make  you  comfortable  by  a 
cheerful  blaze. 

In  those  Indian  dwellings  you  are  seldom  annoyed  by  mosquitoes 
or  the  still  more  terrible  sand-flies.  But  alas  for  him  who,  unshel- 
tered, has  to  spend  the  night  among  the  insects  and  reptiles  of 
the  marshy  lands  near  the  coast !  Soon  will  the  old  complaint 
be  his — 

"  ]\Iali  culices  ranaeque  palustres 
Avertunt  somnos." 

With  face  swollen  and  smarting,  eyes  bleared  with  smoke,  limbs 
unrefreshed,  and  temper  most  unpleasantly  tried,  the  traveller,  as 
soon  as  the  tide  will  allow,  takes  down  his  hammock  and  hastens 
his  departure. 


CHAPTER  X. 

THE   WARAUS    OR   GUAEANOS. 

Cabaca"buri — Opposition  among  tlie  Caribs — The  Waraus — Unsuc- 
cessful Voyages  and  Journeys — Great  and  sudden  Change — 
Efforts  of  the  Post-holder  and  the  Indians. 

About  one  mile  from  the  IndiaD  statiou  which  we 
had  formed  ou  the  Pomeroon  is  the  first  hill  met  with 
on  the  banks  of  the  river.  From  the  side  of  that 
hill  there  rises  a  giant  silk-cotton  tree,  towering  high 
above  the  surrounding  forest  and  attracting  the  eye 
of  every  passer-by.  High  up  amidst  its  overhanging 
foliage  are  seen  the  pendent  nests  of  the  mocking- 
birds :  and  parasites  of  various  kinds  cover  its 
branches  and  entwine  its  trunk.  The  Indian  name 
of  the  hill  is  Cabacaburi.  In  the  olden  time  it 
belonged  to  the  Arawaks,  and  had  since  been  occu- 
pied by  settlers  as  a  woodcutting  establishment.  It 
was  abandoned  in  1843.  Dr.  Austin,  then  newly 
consecrated  as  first  Bishop  of  Guiana,  in  the  course  of 
his  voyages  among  the  aborigines,  visited  our  Indians, 
and  after  admitting  their  teacher  to  holy  orders, 
purchased  Cabacaburi  for  their  use.  The  statiou 
(with  the  exception  of  the  chapel)  was  soon  after 
removed  thitlier. 

M  2 


164  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

It  was  not  without  a  feelino^  of  reoTet  that  the  old 
settlement  could  be  quitted ;  for,  though  unhealthy, 
it  had  been  endeared  by  many  associations.  But 
for  health  and  comfort  the  new  place  of  residence 
was  much  superior.  It  soon  became  a  pleasant  and 
picturesque  spot.  A  large  village  there  sprang  up, 
the  Caribs  erecting  one  half,  and  the  Araw^ks  the 
other.  Among  the  houses  were  large  clumps  of 
tall  and  feather-like  bamboos ;  while  the  cocoa-nut 
and  paripi  palms — the  bread-nut,  mango,  orange,  lime, 
guava,  and  other  trees,  ''  pleasant  to  the  sight  or  good 
for  food "  added  to  the  beauty  of  the  settlement  by 
their  varied  shapes  and  foliage. 

The  Caribs  of  the  vicinity  had  joined  us  ;  but  those 
who  dwelt  near  the  head  of  the  Pomeroon  still  held 
aloof.  The  majority  of  them  knew  very  little  English, 
and  were  influenced  by  one  of  theu*  number  who 
could  speak  it  very  well,  but  acted  in  opposition  to 
us.  I  visited  this  person,  and  found  him  an  intel- 
ligent man,  though  living  in  the  barbarous  fashion 
of  his  heathen  countrymen.  He  was  very  civil  in 
his  language,  but  took  no  pains  to  conceal  his  aversion 
to  Christianity.  Eising  from  his  stool,  he  cut  short 
our  interview  by  asking  me  to  go  with  him,  and  see  a 
fine  "king  of  the  vultures"  which  he  had  captured. 

It  was  a  splendid  bird,  and  of  large  size.  Its  head, 
destitute  of  feathers,  but  shaded  with  delicate  tints 
of  pink  and  orange,  and  set  off  with  brilliant  pearl- 
coloured  eyes,  seemed,  with  the  ruff  round  its  neck 
and  other  plumage,  to  call  forth  the  admiration  of 
my   Carib  host.     But  we  were  both  obliged  to   keep 


^<  1  %  H  <*    i 


THE  WARAUS  OR  GUARANOS.  165 

to  windward,  on  accoimt  of  the  odour  of  a  number 
of  putrefying  fish  given  it  for  foocl,  over  whieli, 
though  they  were  not  yet  in  a  suftieiently  advanced 
stage  of  decomposition,  the  feathered  epicure  was 
begimiing  to  spread  and  flap  his  wings,  anticipating 
the  future  banquet. 

The  object  of  my  visits  to  this  district  was  totally 
defeated  for  the  time  by  the  influence  of  this  man  and 
others  of  the  Caribi  leaders. 

The  state  of  the  Waraus  in  the  remoter  districts 
then  became  a  subject  of  reflection  and  solicitude. 
They  had  always  ranked  lowest  among  the  coast 
tribes  of  Guiana;  and  not  one  hopeful  sign  had  as 
yet  appeared  among  them. 

In  person  the  Waraus  are  short,  stoutly  built,  and 
capable  of  great  exertion  ;  but  they  are  generally  very 
careless  of  their  personal  appearance,  and  their  filtlii- 
ness  is  proverbial.  They  care  so  little  for  clothing, 
that  even  their  females  frequently  content  themselves 
with  a  small  piece  of  the  bark  of  a  tree,  or  the 
net-like  covering  of  the  young  leaf  of  the  cocoa-nut 
or  cabbage-palm  ;  and  their  appearance  is  sc[ualid  and 
disagreeable.  Many  of  the  young  persons  of  this 
tribe  possess  veiy  good  features,  which  I  have  once 
or  twice  seen  disfigured  by  a  thin  piece  of  silver, 
suspended  from  the  cartilage  of  the  nostrils,  and 
covering  the  upper  lip. 

As  they  so  seldom  cover  their  bodies,  their  skins  are 
darker  than  those  of  the  other  tribes.  It  has  been 
said  that  it  is  difficult  at  times  to  disting-uish  the 
Warau  from  the  negro  ;   but  this  is   incorrect :  fi'om 


166  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

continual  exposure  and  want  of  cleanliness  their  skins 
are  somewliat  darker  than  those  of  other  Indians,  but 
that  is  all. 

Though  careless  to  the  last  degree,  and  averse  to 
continuous  employment,  no  Indians  are  so  much  sought 
after  as  labourers.  When  they  can  be  induced  to 
begin,  they  will  do  more  work  than  others,  and  are 
satisfied  with  less  wages  if  rum  be  given  liberally. 

They  inhabit  the  swampy  district  so  often  men- 
tioned, and,  being  near  the  sea,  are  excellent  fisher- 
men, and  subsist  much  upon  the  productions  of  the 
waters.  They  cultivate  cassava  and  other  vegetables, 
but  do  not  pay  sufficient  attention  to  agriculture,  and 
in  times  of  scarcity  betake  themselves  to  the  ita 
palms,  which  abound  in  the  swamps.  This  tree 
is  of  the  greatest  service  to  them.  They  are  fond 
of  its  fruit,  and  at  certain  seasons  make  of  its  pith 
a  substitute  for  bread,  while  its  trunk  is  sometimes 
split  and  used  in  flooring  their  dwellings,  and  its 
leaf  supplies  the  fibrous  material  of  which,  among 
other  useful  things,  they  make  strong  and  serviceable 
hammocks,  which  form  an  important  article  in  their 
little  traffic. 

They  are  also  noted  for  making  canoes,  with 
which  they  supply  the  whole  colony,  the  Arawaks 
sometimes  undertaking  long  voyages  to  their  remote 
settlements,  and  bringing  the  canoes,  to  be  again 
sold  to  the  settlers,  or  disposed  of  among  themselves. 
The  canoe,  or  -'woibaka,"  as  it  is  called  by  the 
Waraus,  is  most  excellently  adapted  to  the  wants  of 
the  Indians,  though  shaped  and  hollowed  with  rude 


THE  WARAUS  OR  GUARANOS.  167 

implements  and  mthout  any  assistance  from  the  rules 
of  art.  Some  of  tliem  used  by  the  Spaniards  are  said 
to  have  been  known  to  carry  one  hundred  men  and  a 
three-pounder ;  ^  but  the  largest  I  have  seen  could  not 
have  carrietl  more  than  fifty  persons, 

AVere  the  Waraus  more  careful  of  their  gains,  and 
more  prompt  to  avail  themselves  of  advantages,  no 
tribe  in  Guiana  could  be  in  more  respectable  circum- 
stances ;  but  they  have  not  yet  learned  to  make  the 
slightest  provision  beyond  what  absolute  necessity 
requu'es.  If  successful  in  hunting,  a  scene  of  ex- 
cessive gluttony  follows,  until  the  game  is  consumed, 
and  returning  hunger  forces  them  to  exertion.  If 
unsuccessful,  they  are  capable  of  enduring  great 
privation.  They  can  also  paddle  a  canoe  with 
greater  vigour  and  for  a  longer  time  than  the  other 
Indians. 

Such  are  the  Waraus  ;  strong  and  hardy  in 
person,  but  slovenly  and  du'ty ;  merry  and  cheerful 
in  disposition,  but  careless  and  improvident. 

They  Avere  utterly  ignorant,  and  consequently  very 
superstitious,  their  sorcerers  being  considered  to  pos- 
sess greater  power  over  the  evil  spirits  than  those  of 
any  other  tribe. 

After  repeated  efibrts  during  two  years  among  the 
Waraus  of  Manawarin,  finding  no  change  in  their 
disposition,  I  resolved  to  try  another  field  of  laljour, 
and  began  to  visit  a  small  river  in  the  vicinity,  called 
Haimara-Cabura.  Little  satisfaction  attended  the  first 
visit,  as  the  people  at  the  settlement  where  we  took 
1  M.  JMartin,  p.  50. 


168  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

up  our  quarters  were  at  no  pains  to  conceal  their 
indifference  or  dislike.  A  fine  young  fellow  had  a 
kind  of  javelin,  the  shaft  of  which  was  made  of  a 
strong  reed,  in  one  end  of  which  was  inserted  a  piece 
of  hard  wood,  forming  the  point.  He  continued  to 
hurl  this  at  a  mark  on  the  soft  stem  of  a  plantain- 
tree,  which  was  pierced  through ;  the  pointed  wood 
remaining  firmly  fixed  in  the  tree  while  the  elastic 
staff  flew  back  towards  the  man  who  had  cast  it.  He 
told  me  that  it  was  used  in  striking  the  morocote 
and  other  large  fish  :  fruit  or  seeds  which  they  are 
fond  of  being  scattered  on  the  still  water,  while  the 
Indian  watches  their  rising  and  kills  them  with  an 
arrow  or  this  kind  of  dart. 

These  people  paid  little  or  no  attention  to  our 
evening  worship, — did  not  wish  to  be  taught, — and 
seemed  thoroughly  ill-tempered.  After  we  had  retired 
to  rest,  a  child  happening  to  cry,  one  of  the  women 
arose  from  her  hammock,  and  taking  a  large  piece  of 
firewood,  struck  it  violently  several  times  as  it  lay, 
and  then  suddenly  caught  it  up,  ran  to  the  bush, 
and  hurled  it  from  her.  It  fell  on  the  ground,  appa- 
rently much  hurt.  I  had  not  witnessed  such  brutality 
among  the  other  tribes ;  but  concluded  that  they 
were  all  out  of  temper  because  I  had  brought  no  rum 
to  give  them,  for  which  they  were  very  importunate. 
The  next  morning  they  demanded  money  for  the 
shelter  they  had  afforded  myself  and  party, — a  thing 
I  had  never  heard  of  amono;  the  Indians  of  Guiana. 

They  were  thoroughly  wedded  to  their  superstitions, 
and  practised  them  without  reserve.     On  one  occasion 


THE  WARAUS  OR  GUARANOS.  169 

we  passed  an  old  man  fishing  in  a  canoe  on  the 
Manawarin.  The  clouds  threatened  rain,  and  when 
he  perceived  it,  he  began  to  use  extraordinary  ges- 
ticulations, flourishing  his  arms,  and  shouting  his  in- 
cantations to  drive  it  away.  It  soon  cleared  up, 
and  the  old  sorcerer  rejoiced  at  his  success,  as  he 
deemed  it. 

In  the  course  of  another  voyage,  we  passed  a  Warau 
similarly  engaged  in  fishing,  and  apparently  so  intent 
upon  his  pursuit  that  he  could  neither  observe  us  pass- 
ing nor  answer  our  salutation.  AVhen  we  had  got  a 
little  distance  from  him,  he  inquii-ed  of  the  Arawak 
who  was  steering  our  canoe,  whether  I  had  many  of 
the  "hebo,"  or  evil  spirits,  attending  me.  The  answer, 
"  They  are  entirely  wanting,"  was  accompanied  by  a 
loud  laugh  from  my  crew.  It  appeared  that  the 
Waraus  in  their  ignorance  regarded  a  missionary  as  a 
powerful  enchanter,  and  the  change  in  the  other  tribes 
as  the  effect  of  magic. 

These  discouragements  continued  u])  to  the  close 
of  1844.  But  at  that  time,  and  while  their  case 
appeared  to  me  as  utterly  hopeless,  some  of  those 
people  commenced  attending  the  station  on  the  Lower 
Pomeroon.  An  account  of  this  was  speeddy  sent 
to  me  by  Mr.  Campbell,  who  had  succeeded  Mr. 
Smithett  as  teacher  there  :  and  it  seemed  expedient 
to  visit  them  without  delay.  Accordingly,  I  set  out 
on  the  1 5th  of  December  for  the  Haimara-Cabura ; 
resting  the  second  night  at  an  Arawak  settlement  in 
the  Koraia,  the  scene  of  the  Maquarri  dance.  The 
w^eather  was  tempestuous,  the  rainy  season  having  set 


170  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

in  witli  violence,  and  we  took  this  route  to  avoid  tlie 
necessity  of  crossing  the  sea,  as  there  is  a  passage 
called  the  Itabbo  leading  to  the  Manawarin  through 
the  forests,  which  is  only  navigable  when  the  whole 
country  is  inundated.  On  the  morning  of  the  18th 
we  set  out  from  the  settlement  in  the  Koraia,  across 
the  savannah,  then  covered  with  water.  The  reeds 
and  grass  appearing  above  the  surface  caused  it  to  re- 
semble at  a  little  distance  a  pleasant  lawn ;  while  the 
islets  and  the  main  land  were  finely  wooded,  and  an 
ita-tree  here  and  there  stood  in  solitary  beauty  in  the 
midst  of  the  savannah.  A  double  rainbow  appeared 
as  we  started,  whose  bright  colours  contrasted  vividly 
with  the  dark  clouds  as  it  spanned  our  intended 
course.  We  proceeded  through  the  Itabbo,  meeting 
with  much  difficulty,  owing  to  the  fallen  trees  which 
obstructed  the  channel.  I  had  formerly  travelled 
that  way  with  ]\Ir.  Smithett,  but  the  impediments  had 
much  increased  in  number  since  that  time. 

We  arrived  at  the  settlement  in  Haimara-Cabura, 
and  the  intelligence  soon  spread  through  the  neigh- 
bourhood. The  Waraus  began  to  assemble.  I  was 
not  sorry,  for  there  were  but  two  men  at  the  place, — 
an  old  and  a  young  one ;  the  former  very  savage  and 
crabbed  in  his  manner.  Endeavours  to  soothe  him, 
by  praising  the  beauty  of  the  skin  of  an  ocelot, 
wliich  he  had  made  into  a  cap,  and  wore  with  the 
tail  appending  behind,  were  all  in  vain  ;  he  turned  a 
deaf  ear  to  everything  spoken,  whether  pleasant  or 
serious.  The  young  fellow  was  also  very  annoying, 
and  ridiculously  insolent,  for  placing  himself  immeT- 


THE  WABAUS  OR  GUABANOS.  171 

diately  in  front  lie  contiaiuecl  to  dance  {at  me  as  it 
seemed)  the  ungraceful,  staggering  dance  of  his  nation 
at  intervals  during  the  whole  day. 

A^Hien  their  chief,  named  Damon,  arrived,  he  told 
me  that  the  old  man  was  a  great  sorcerer,  which 
explained  his  moroseness,  AVhen  I  began  to  speak  to 
the  people  he  seemed  much  excited ;  and  when  he 
saw  them  arrange  themselves  for  evening  worship, 
probably  thinking  it  a  proof  that  the  spirits  who 
favoured  the  Christian  religion  were  more  powerful 
than  his  own  familiars,  he  paid  them  the  com- 
pliment of  putting  on  a  clean  white  shirt  and 
joining  us. 

The  last  party  who  came  were  heard  about  this 
time  a  lono-  distance  off,  shoutino;  with  all  their 
might.  I  met  them  as  they  landed  from  their 
canoes,  and  told  them  that  we  were  about  to  speak 
to  the  great  God  our  Maker  and  Lord,  whom  they 
must  approach  with  reverence.  This  had  the  desired 
effect,  and  those  poor  ignorant  beings  behaved  with 
great  reverence  during  the  singing  and  prayer.  I 
afterwards  addressed  them  in  the  broken  English  of 
which  many  of  them  knew  a  little.  They  now 
appeared  very  anxious  to  1)e  taught,  and  I  was 
astonished  at  the  change  ;  while  hoping  that  it  might 
be  the  commencement  of  their  iugatheririg  to  the 
Church  of  God. 

When  night  came  on,  the  people  whose  habita- 
tions were  near  departed ;  the  others  tied  up  their 
hammocks  wherever  they  could  find  a  place.  There 
was  much  lauohter  over  their  fires,  and  more  talking ; 


172  TEE  INDIAN  TRI£ES  OF  GUIANA. 

but  al]  agreed  to  follow  me  on  my  retm:"!!  to  Cale- 
donia, and  to  continue  to  attend  there  until  a  teacher 
could  be  placed  among  tlicm.  They  fulfilled  their 
promise,  and  on  the  Lord's  day  the  place  of  worship 
was  crowded  with  Indians, — Arawaks,  AYaraus,  and 
Caribs.  People  from  every  neighbouring  creek,  some 
even  from  Moruca,  came  without  having  been 
invited. 

This  sudden  change  in  the  disposition  of  the 
Waraus  drew  the  attention  of  the  Post-holder,  Mr. 
M'Clintock,  who  had  always  used  his  influence  in 
inducing  the  Indians  to  receive  Chiistian  instruction. 
They  were  now  become  too  numerous  to  be  accom- 
modated at  Caledonia,  w^here  the  mosquitoes  were 
also  painfully  annoying,  depriving  them  of  sleep. 
The  sea,  which  they  had  to  cross,  had  sometimes 
swamped  the  Caribi  canoes,  which  were  very  small, 
and  only  adapted  for  smooth  water  and  the  heads 
of  the  rivers.  On  those  occasions  both  men  and 
women  jumped  into  the  sea,  and  hung  by  the  canoe 
with  one  hand  till  the  water  could  be  baled  out. 
Notwithstanding,  they  complained  that  they  had 
sometimes  lost  their  hammocks,  and  got  their  bread 
spoiled  by  the  sea-water.  A  new  station  thus  be- 
came necessary.  Mr.  M'Clintock  informed  me  of 
the  existence  of  a  fine  hill,  or  elevated  sand-reef, 
on  the  banks  of  the  Moruca,  near  the  mouth  of 
Haimara-Cabura  ;  and  he  took  advantage  of  the  dis- 
position of  the  Waraus  to  assemble  a  great  number 
of  them,  who  began  to  cut  down  the  forest  to  form 
a  mission -station  among  themselves. 


THE  WARAUS  OB  GVARANOS.  173 

While  he  was  thus  engaged,  I  went  to  George- 
town, and  brought  the  matter  before  the  Demerara 
and  Essequibo  branch  of  the  Society  for  the  Propa- 
gation of  the  Gospel.  The  application  was  imme- 
diately received,  and  a  sum  of  money  voted  to 
commence  with,  but  there  was  no  missionary  whose 
services  were  available.  When  this  was  made  appa- 
rent, and  the  question,  "  Whom  shall  we  send  V 
proposed  by  Archdeacon  Lugar,  Mr.  J.  H.  Nowers, 
who  was  present,  rose  up,  offered  himself  for  the  work, 
and  was  immediately  appointed  to  the  mission. 

On  my  return,  I  found  some  hundreds  of  Indians 
assembled  at  the  site  of  the  proposed  mission-station. 
They  had  already  cleared  a  large  tract  of  sand-reef 
under  the  superintendence  of  the  Post-holder,  who 
had  erected  a  shed  for  his  accommodation,  over 
which  a  large  flag  was  waving  in  the  breeze. 

Some  of  the  Waraus  present  had  come  from  very 
remote  quarters.  They  were  headed  by  an  old  chief 
named  Clementia,  who  drew  them  up  in  order,  form- 
ing three  sides  of  a  square,  to  hear  what  I  had  to 
say.  The  old  chief  bore  his  silver-headed  staff  in 
his  hand,  and  had  on  a  once  fashionable  black  coat, 
wdth  long  swallow  tails  and  very  high  collar,  but  no 
other  garment,  except  his  scanty  Indian  cloth.  His 
people  were  even  wilder  and  more  grotesque  than 
himself.  The  messaoje  with  which  I  was  charged 
was  explained  to  the  Waraus  by  Stoll,  Mr, 
M'Clintock's  interpreter,  and  great  was  their  joy  to 
hear  that  a  resident  missionary  was  about  to  be 
placed  among  them. 


174  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

The  work  then  proceeded  with  great  rapidity.  In 
every  direction  were  heard  the  crash  of  falling  trees, 
and  the  shouts  of  the  Waraus.  The  posts  and 
timber  for  the  erection  of  the  chapel  and  mission- 
house  were  soon  cut,  and  a  settler  employed  to 
erect  the  latter. 

None  of  the  Indians  received  wages.  They  pro- 
vided their  own  cassava  bread,  and  a  few  casks  of 
salt  fish  furnished  them  with  rations.  A  puncheon 
of  molasses  was  also  sent  for  their  use  by  Mr. 
HuQfhes,  manaojer  of  Plantation  Anna  Eesjina,  who 
had  heard  of  tlieir  exertions.  Sixty  men  went  to 
that  estate,  after  the  clearing  was  over,  to  work 
for  clothing. 

How  different  were  the  prospects  in  March  1845, 
as  it  regarded  the  spread  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ 
among  them,  to  those  presented  six  months  before! 
Those  events  were  surprising  at  the  time  to  those 
who  witnessed  them.  To  myself  especially,  who 
during  many  fruitless  expeditions  had  seen  so  many 
proofs  of  their  unwillingness,  the  present  change 
seemed  the  work  of  God.  Nor  was  this  feeling 
lessened  at  beholding  the  manner  in  which  the 
altered  disposition  of  the  Waraus  was  met  by  the 
exertions  of  the  Post-holder,  and  the  appointment 
of  a  missionary,  between  whom  and  myself  there 
existed  the  bond  of  former  friendship,  and  a  recent 
family  tie. 

Of  the  promising  appearance  of  all  the  Indian 
Missions  in  the  colony,  the  Hon.  H.  C.  F.  Young, 
then   Government   Secretary,   publicly  stated  that  it 


THE  WARAUS  OR  GUARANOS.  175 

might  (at  that  thne)  have  been  said,  "  ahiio.st  with- 
out a  figure  of  speech :" — 

"  The  wiklerness  and  the  solitary  phice  shall  be 
glad  for  them,  and  the  desert  sliall  rejoice  and 
blossom  as   the  rose." 

Note. — Thougli  a  few  scattered  hordes  of  Waraus  (to  be  noticed 
hereafter)  are  found  in  other  parts  of  our  province,  especially  on  its 
eastern  boundary,  yet  the  region  mentioned  above,  which  extends 
in  a  north-westerly  direction  from  the  Pomeroon  to  (and  beyond)  the 
Orinoco,  must  be  considered  as  the  proper  territory  of  their  nation. 

It  is  in  the  delta  of  the  latter  rivei',  and  the  low  country  which 
borders  its  mouth,  that  their  rtide  and  peculiar  way  of  life  is  seen 
in  its  perfection. 

There,  the  lands  being  completely  inundated  by  the  overflowing 
river  for  some  months  in  each  year,  the  Warau  is  forced  to  con- 
struct his  dwelling  above  the  flood,  and  among  the  trees  from 
•which  a  large  portion  of  his  food  is  derived.  He  uses,  where  pos- 
sible, their  upright  trunks  as  posts  ; — thatches  the  roof  beneath 
their  leafy  crowns ; — fixes  the  lower  beams  a  few  feet  above  the 
highest  level  of  the  water,  and  lays  thereon  the  split  ita  trunks  for 
flooring.  On  the  latter  the  hearth  and  fire  are  placed  and  culinary 
operations  performed ;  while  from  the  upper  beams  the  hammocks 
of  his  family  are  suspended.  The  ever-ready  tvolbaka,  or  canoe, 
gives  them  the  means  of  locomotion  for  fishing  and  other  purposes, 
until  the  flood  has  subsided  and  terra  fir  ma  again  appears. 


CHAPTER    XI. 

WAP.AMURI. 

Conversation  with  an  old  Warau — Erection  of  tlie  Mission  Build- 
ings— Sickness  of  Missionaries — Extraordinary  Imposture — 
Long  Drought — Waramuri  Mission  nearly  destroyed  by  Fire — 
Famine — Mortality  by  Dysentery — Progress  of  the  Mission — 
Distant  Indians  desire  a  Teacher. 

The  name  of  the  hill  which  the  Indians  had  so 
speedily  cleared  of  the  venerable  forest  that  had 
covered  it  for  ages  is  Waramuri.  This  is  the 
name  of  a  species  of  black  ant  with  which  the 
spot  abounded.  It  is  situated  near  the  junction  of 
the  Haimara-Cabura  with  the  Moruca,  and  is  about 
sixty  miles  (travelling  by  water)  from  the  Upper 
Mission  in  Pomeroon. 

About  a  month  after  the  circumstances  recorded 
in  the  last  chapter,  I  found  the  clearing  completed, 
and  the  frame  of  the  mission-house  erected.  All  the 
people  were  gone,  except  the  interpreter,  and  an  old 
wild-looking  Warau,  named  John,  and  his  family,  who 
were  awaiting  the  arrival  of  the  new  missionary.  As 
this  was  delayed  for  some  days,  a  good  opportunity 
was  afforded  of  examining  the  situation. 


WARAMUEI.  177 

A  ridge  of  sand  gradually  ascends  from  the  mouth 
of  the  Haimara-Cabiira  to  a  considerable  height,  and 
terminates  abruptly  in  a  tumulus  resembling  an 
ancient  barrow.  One  side  of  this  mound  is  precipi- 
tous, the  other  connected  Avitli  the  sand  reef.  It 
seemed  chiefly  composed  of  small  shells,  resembling 
those  of  periwinkles,  and  marked  with  alternate  stripes 
of  white  and  black.  These  were  so  abundant  that  the 
mould  when  taken  up  in  a  shovel  appeared  full  of 
them.  Between  this  hill  and  the  Moruca  there  is  a 
swamp,  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  in  width.  Both  tlie 
swamp  and  the  high  land  were  then  completely 
covered  with  the  newly  felled  trees.  From  the  top 
of  the  hill  we  could  look  down  upon  the  forest,  and 
trace  the  course  of  the  Moruca  and  two  tributary 
streams ;  the  trees  on  their  banks  being  higher  than 
those  in  the  other  parts  of  the  forest. 

Being  desirous  of  knowing  what  the  Waraus  thought 
of  the  sand  reef  and  the  heap  of  shells  on  which  we 
stood,  I  inquired  of  the  old  man  through  the  inter- 
preter. He  at  once  said,  that  when  the  world  was 
made  that  ridge  was  the  sea-coast.  A  conversation 
then  arose  respecting  the  creation  of  mankind.  The 
old  man  said  that  "  three  different  races  were  made  by 
God, — white,  red,  and  black.  Each  of  those  races  was 
intended  to  live  as  we  then  saw  them."  The  religion 
of  our  Lord,  he  said,  was  doubtless  "good  for  ivhite 
men,  as  they  professed  it,  but  not  for  the  red  men,  or 
they  would  have  followed  it  from  the  beginning." 

It  soon  appeared  that  his  principal  oljjection  to 
Christianity  arose   from   the   fact   that   he    had    two 

N 


178  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

wives,  and  had  already  discovered  that  Christians 
were  only  allowed  to  have  one.  He  spoke  with 
great  animation  on  this  point.  "  I  really  cannot 
put  away  my  young  wife,"  said  he ;  "  and  as  for 
the  old  one,  I  certainly  will  not  dismiss  her ;  for 
she  grew  up  with  me,  and  is  the  mother  of  most 
of  my  children."  When  told  that  God  had  appointed 
but  one  wife  for  each  man,  he  seemed  to  think 
it  very  hard.  On  being  asked  why  a  man  should 
have  two  wives,  and  a  w^oman  not  be  allowed  two 
husbands,  he  directly  said  that  his  tribe  did  not  con- 
sider either  practice  to  be  bad ;  and  that  he  knew 
a  Warau  woman  who  had  three.  Our  further  con- 
versation showed  the  utter  grossness  of  their  minds, 
and  that  my  brother  would  have  no  easy  task  before 
him. 

When  Mr.  Nowers  arrived,  his  exertions  were  so 
well  seconded  by  the  Indians  that  the  erection  of 
the  buildings  advanced  rapidly.  They  were  built 
of  rough  timber,  and  thatched  with  trooly  leaves. 
As  the  Moruca  and  its  tributary  streams  are 
destitute  of  this  tree,  every  leaf  had  to  be  fetched 
from  the  Pomeroon  in  their  small  canoes,  each  trip 
occupying  at  least  three  days.  The  labour  thus  be- 
stowed was  only  remunerated  by  a  small  allowance 
of  salt  fish  and  molasses.  As  no  sailing-vessel  can 
enter  the  Moruca,  the  boards  for  the  buildings  were 
brought  by  the  Indians  in  the  same  manner  from 
its  mouth,  a  few  at  a  time.  The  Waraus  and 
Manawarin  Caribs  did  most  of  this  laborious  work ; 
the  Arawaks  in  the  vicinity  of  the  mission  thatched 


WAJRAMUBI.  179 

the  sides  and  roofs  of  the  buildings,  and  the  car- 
penter's work  was  performed  by  settlers  from  the 
Pomeroon.  The  sum  granted  by  the  Demerara  and 
Essequibo  District  Society  was  about  170/.  sterling, 
and  the  labour  of  the  Indians  would  have  cost  an 
equal  sum  had  it  been  necessary  to  pay  them. 

As  soon  as  the  house  was  habitable,  ]\Ir.  Nowers 
brought  his  family  to  the  mission.  An  accident 
happened  while  they  were  passing  up  the  Moruca, 
which  might  have  been  attended  with  fatal  conse- 
quences. The  mouth  of  this  stream  forms  a  rapid 
during  the  rainy  season,  from  its  extreme  narrowness 
and  the  immense  quantity  of  water  which  there 
finds  its  outlet.  Wild  mangroves  overhang  it,  whose 
roots  and  branches,  somewhat  resemblino^  those  of 
the  banian-tree  in  the  East,  descend  into  the  water. 
While  the  crew  of  the  large  canoe  which  contained 
the  family  were  vainly  striving  to  overcome  the 
ojiposing  current,  two  Indian  boys  from  the  Pome- 
roon Mission,  who  were  in  a  small  canoe  loaded 
with  plantains,  got  entangled  among  the  mangroves  ; 
their  frail  craft  turned  broadside  to  the  current, 
and  was  driven  \dolently  against  a  mass  of  spread- 
ing roots.  One  of  them,  an  Arawak,  was  com- 
pletely hoisted  out  by  a  branch,  and  hung  suspended, 
clinging  to  it  for  some  little  time  ;  then,  without 
losing  his  presence  of  mind,  he  swung  himself 
several  feet  over  the  whuiing  and  dashing  water 
into  the  nearly-overturned  canoe.  It  was  a  moment 
of  great  anxiety  to  us,  as  we  were  quite  unable 
to    approach    them.      But    providentially    the    canoe 

N   2 


180  THE  INDIAN  TBIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

was  not  swamped,  though  veiy  small ;  the  impeding 
roots  and  branches  gave  way,  and  they  slipped 
through  them,  and  shot  down  the  stream  with  us 
to  await  the  moment  of  high  water.  They  were 
neither  of  them  twelve  years  old,  and,  though  ex- 
cellent swimmers,  must  have  been  carried  under  the 
roots  of  the  trees  and  drowned  had  they  fallen  into 
the  stream. 

A  little  after  dark  we  reached  Waramuri,  and  as 
the  sound  of  the  paddles  was  heard  by  the  people 
on  the  hill,  a  great  number  of  lights  were  seen 
advancing  to  meet  us ;  and  on  landing,  the  hearty 
greeting  of  about  one  hundred  Caribi  men  and 
women  was  almost  overwhelming.  All  were  press- 
ing to  shake  hands,  and  to  carry  some  little  article 
from  tae  canoe  to  the  house.  It  was  a  grateful 
spectacle,  and  very  cheering  to  the  new  comers. 

I  was  soon  after  compelled  to  leave  my  station 
for  a  time  by  the  effects  of  a  severe  fever,  and 
Mr.  Nowers  had  a  very  serious  illness  while  visiting 
Georgetown  for  the  purpose  of  being  admitted  into 
holy  orders,  his  wife  being  dangerously  ill  at  the 
same  time. 

About  this  time  a  remarkable  imposture  was 
practised  upon  the  Indians  in  that  part  of  Guiana. 
A  person  pretending  to  be  the  Lord  went  into  the 
interior  with  some  deluded  followers,  and  established 
himself  in  the  upper  part  of  the  Masaruni.  From  this 
distant  spot,  he  sent  emissaries  into  the  neighbourhood 
of  all  the  missions,  calling  on  the  Indians  to  quit  their 
homes  and  provision-grounds,  and  go  to  him.     They 


nwEAMuni.  181 

were  told  that  they  should  possess  lands  which 
would  yield  a  large  crop  of  cassava  from  a  single 
stick,  and  various  other  absurdities,  very  alluring  to 
the  indolent  Indian.  Those  tales,  joined  to  threats 
of  horrible  destruction  which  should  come  upon  all 
who  refused  to  go,  had  their  influence  upon  the 
minds  of  many,  and  lured  them  away. 

The  movement  commenced  with  the  Acawoios  near 
the  Essecjuibo,  who  had  been  observed  to  be  providing 
themselves  with  fire-arms  for  some  time  before  they 
set  out.  They  were  anxious  to  get  the  Caribs  to  join 
them,  and  hundreds  of  Indians  of  different  tribes  went 
from  all  parts  of  the  country  to  "  see  God,"  as  they 
termed  it,  some  of  whom  perished  by  sickness  on 
the  way,  and  others  found  themselves  in  a  state  of 
destitution  on  arriving  at  the  spot. 

Intelligence  of  this  singular  movement  was  con- 
veyed to  the  Bishop  of  Guiana,  whose  invalid  guest 
I  was  at  that  time.  Having  learned  the  particulars, 
I  hastened  to  the  mission,  though  still  very  weak ; 
and  Mr.  Nowers  followed  with  his  family  as  soon  as  he 
was  able  to  travel.  We  found  that  not  one  baptized 
person,  and  only  one  catechumen,  had  been  enticed 
away ;  but  those  who  had  kept  aloof  from  Christian 
instruction  had  fallen  readily  into  the  deceitful 
snare. 

In  the  more  remote  districts  some  settlements  were 
completely  deserted.  The  inhabitants  of  others  had 
been  part  of  the  way,  and  then  returned,  famished 
and  ashamed.  In  the  upper  part  of  the  Pomeroon 
I  found  that  the  course  of  the  river  was  obstructed 


1S2  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

by  two  trees  of  great  height,  which  had  been  cut 
from  the  banks  to  afford  then  families  the  means 
of  crossing  in  their  hasty  march.  Still  the  number 
of  Caribs  who  went  was  but  small  compared  with 
that  of  the  Acawoios,  who  left  their  settlements  on 
the  Barima  and  Barahma  for  a  long  time. 

Kobise,    the    Caribi    catechumen,    who    had    been 

deluded     away,     soon    returned    to   Waramuri,    and 

thus  detailed  the  particulars  of  his  journey  : — "  We 

travelled  as  fast  as  we  could  for  thirteen  days,  and 

at  length  arrived  at  a  savannah  where  some  hundreds 

of  Acawoios   and  others   were   assembled.     They  had 

as  yet  scarcely  any  field  provisions,  and  game  was 

scarce  from  the  multitude  of  hunters.     T  was  led  to 

a  little  enclosed   hut,  from  which    T    heard   a   voice 

commanding  me  to  return,  and  fetch  my  friends  and 

neighbours,   as   a   great  fire   and  water  would   come 

upon  the  whole  world  except  that  spot."     He  said 

also  that  the  impostor  did  not  make  himself  visible, 

but  remained  concealed  from  all,  as  far  as  he  could 

learn,  delivering  his  predictions  by  night ;   and  that 

his  voice  sounded  like  that  of  a  white  person.     He 

also  added,   that  on  looking   around   him   he   could 

see   nothing    but    drinking    and    dancmg,    a   portion 

of  the  little  cassava  bread  Avliich  they  could   obtain 

being  made  into  paiwari ;  and  from  this  he  became 

apprehensive  that  it  was  a  delusion  of  the  Yurokou, 

or  evil  spirit,   and  made  his  escape  from  them  the 

same  night,  and  returned. 

This    strange    story,    the    leading   facts    of   which 
have  been  well  authenticated  by  other  evidence,  is 


WAEAMURL  183 

a  remarkable  illustration  of  Matt.  xxiv.  26  (a  text 
which  struck  the  Indians  greatly  when  it  was  ex- 
plained to  them  on  that  occasion),  inasmuch  as  the 
impostor  was  both  "  in  a  secret  chamber "  and  in 
"  the  desert."  It  showed  us  the  necessity  of  using 
every  effort  to  spread  among  those  simple  people 
the  knowledge  which  alone  could  make  them  truly 
wise.  At  the  same  time,  it  proved  that  the  know- 
ledge of  the  existence  of  a  Saviour  from  destruction 
had  even  then  spread  very  widely,  although  to 
many  it  was  but  as  a  faintly  gleaming  light,  not 
sufficient  to  keep  them  from  going  into  error. 

A  long  period  of  drought  ensued.  The  rainy 
season,  which  is  expected  to  commence  in  Novem- 
ber, was  confined  to  a  few  partial  showers  ;  and  the 
earth  was  parched,  and  vegetation  dried  up  by  the 
long  period  of  heat,  which  lasted  from  August, 
1845,  until  the  following  May. 

During  the  height  of  that  drought,  Waramuri 
Mission  was  in  danger  of  being  destroyed  by  fire. 
The  swamp  in  front  of  it  has  been  already  described. 
It  was  then  covered  with  dry  vegetation,  and  the 
trees  which  had  been  cut  do\^ai  a  year  before.  A 
Caribi  Indian,  named  Plata,  incautiously  set  fire  to 
the  dry  grass,  and  the  flames  soon  began  to  rise,  and 
spread  with  rapidity,  covering  a  space  a  quarter  of  a 
mile  in  extent,  and  advancing  towards  the  mission. 
As  soon  as  the  alarm  was  given,  Mr.  Nowers  and 
the  Indians  present  ran  to  clear  away  the  dried  grass 
and  brushwood  which  covered  the  slope,  that  the 
fire   might  have   nothing  to  feed  upon.     It  reached 


184  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

the  foot  of  tlie  hill,  and  as  it  began  to  climb  in 
any  place,  it  was  beaten  down  with  long  poles.  The 
heat  was  suffocating,  and  both  the  missionary  and 
Indians  were  blackened  by  the  smoke  :  but  after  a 
severe  struggle  with  the  devouring  element,  by 
God's  blessing  on  their  exertions,  the  buildings  and 
their  families  were  saved.  At  four  P.  m.  the  fire 
rushed  over  the  hill  about  thirty  feet  from  the 
chapel,  and  passed  on  in  a  broad  sheet  of  flame, 
devouring  everything  in  its  progress. 

Mr.  Nowers  requiring  medical  assistance  for  his 
family,  I  took  charge  of  Waramuri  for  six  weeks 
after  this.  The  broad  track  of  the  conflagration 
was  perfectly  black.  The  fire  continued  burning 
in  many  places  for  weeks,  feeding  upon  the  peat, 
of  which  the  soil  is  partly  composed,  and  upon 
the  enormous  trunks  of  trees  which  lay  in  every 
direction.  Some  of  those  burning  masses  looked 
perfectly  white  during  the  glare  of  the  sun  by  day, 
and  glowed  with  intense  brightness  as  nio-ht  came 
on.  The  swamps  were  on  fire  in  various  directions. 
One  evening  six  conflagrations  were  visible  in  dif- 
ferent parts  of  the  horizon.  The  nearest  of  these 
communicated  with  a  portion  of  the  forest,  the 
flames  catching  the  dry  leaves,  and  mounting  the 
trees  in  succession  until  their  further  progress  was 
stopped  by  the  river.  Charred  skeletons  of  small 
animals  and  reptiles  might  be  seen  among  the  ashes, 
the  remains  of  snakes  being  especially  numerous. 

While  proceeding  one  day  up  the  river,  a  crackling 
noise   was   heard   at   a   distance,    accompanied   by  a 


WARAMUBI.  185 

dense  smoke.  The  Indians  said  that  a  savannah 
which  we  were  approaching  was  on  fire,  and  imme- 
diately rested  on  their  paddles.  We  soon  saw  the 
flames  driving  before  the  wind,  and  devouring  the 
reeds  and  grass,  while  our  further  progress  was  pre- 
vented by  the  burning  flakes  and  smoke,  until  the 
fire  had  burnt  down  to  the  edge  of  the  stream.  We 
had  to  keep  our  faces  close  to  the  water,  to  escape 
the  sufibcating  vapour. 

The  drought  was  severely  felt  in  the  cultivated  part 
of  the  country,  the  navigable  trenches  of  the  sugar 
estates  being  nearly  dry.  The  rivers,  from  the  want 
of  rain,  had  become  salt  and  brackish  to  a  great 
distance  from  their  mouths.  The  heads  of  the  little 
streamlets  were  sought  for  fresh  water,  and  some  of 
them  became  dry.  The  cassava  which  had  been 
planted  by  the  Indians  in  October,  not  having  the 
expected  rain  to  nourish  it,  did  not  grow.  Hence 
food  became  scarce,  and  many  expedients  were  re- 
sorted to  to  supply  the  deficiency.  The  Waraus 
betook  themselves  to  their  favourite  resource,  the  ita 
swamps ;  and  subsisted  there  as  well  as  they  could. 
When  the  famine  was  at  its  height,  the  fruit  of  the 
wild  cashew  became  ripe,  and  afterwards  that  of  the 
simiri,  or  locust  tree.  From  these  and  others  the 
Indians  managed  to  procure  a  scanty  subsistence,  and 
might  be  seen  emerging  from  the  forest  with  their 
quakes  or  baskets  full  of  them.  Unwholesome  food ! 
for  using  which  they  afterwards  suff*ered  greatly. 

The  rain  fell  at  length  in  torrents,  and  vegetation 
revived    and    flourished.     But    dysentery    began    to 


186  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

carry  off  many  of  the  Waraus  and  others,  who  had 
been  subsisting  for  months  on  the  natural  productions 
of  the  swamps  and  forests.  There  came  from  the 
ita-swamps  to  Waramuri  canoes  full  of  miserably 
attenuated  beings,  who  applied  to  the  missionary  for 
medicine  and  food. 

A  great  number  of  them  died  before  they  made  this 
application.  It  was  painful  to  visit  their  settlements, 
and  hear  the  repeated  exclamation,  "Wabaiya, 
wabaiya  !  "  (Sich,  sick  !)  On  visiting  the  settlement 
where  they  been  so  uncivil  to  me,  Mr.  Nowers 
discovered  that  eight  had  already  died  out  of  twenty- 
three,  and  others  would  probably  have  perished  but  for 
God's  blessing  on  the  remedies  supplied.  As  many  as 
300  doses  of  medicine  were  administered  in  one  month, 
and  with  great  apparent  benefit,  the  reluctance  of  the 
Indians  to  use  it  being  overcome  by  the  urgent 
danger.  It  was  a  period  of  much  distress  and  misery, 
and  were  there  no  other  result  than  the  temporal 
benefit  that  then  flowed  from  the  mission  at 
Waramuri,  all  the  exertion  and  the  small  expense  of 
its  establishment  would  have  been  amply  rewarded. 

When  the  sickness  abated,  the  mission  began  to 
assume  a  most  flourishing  appearance.  Three  hundred 
Indians  attended  instruction,  and  there  were  sixty- 
five  children  at  school. 

As  the  benefits,  both  spiritual  and  temporal,  of 
missions  became  apparent  to  the  people,  so  the  desire 
for  similar  establishments  began  to  spread.  Intelli- 
gence was  brouglit  to  us  that  the  Waraus  in  the  Ai-uka 
were  desirous  of  having  a  missionary  of  our  Church 


WARAMURI.  187 

placed  among  tliem,  and  that  tlieir  chief  had  even 
caused  them  to  erect  a  harge  ]:)uildmg  to  serve  as  a 
place  of  worship.  We  were  preparing  to  visit  that 
part  of  the  country,  though  the  distance  is  so  great 
that  the  voyage  would  occupy  about  three  weeks  in 
going  and  returning.  It  is  situated  in  the  midst  of 
the  tract  which  lies  between  our  territory  and  the 
Orinoco,  and  through  which  flow  several  large 
streams,  one  of  the  principal  being  the  Waini.  Our 
visit  was  unavoidably  prevented,  and  nothing  was 
done.  Still  the  desire  of  those  benighted  people  to 
be  instructed  in  the  religion  of  Christ  seems  worthy 
of  commemoration,  as  no  missionary  had  been  to 
visit  them,  and  the  reports  conveyed  by  their  own 
countrymen  were  all  they  had  to  found  their  desires 
upon.  It  seemed  like  the  fulfilment  of  the  w^ords 
of  prophecy : — "  As  soon  as  they  hear  of  Me,  they 
shall  obey .  Me." 


CHAPTER  XII. 


TKIALS. 


Causes  which  led  to  the  first  Abandonment  of  Waramuri — Danger- 
ous Passage  across  the  Sea — N^arrow  Escape  from  Death  by  an 
Arrow — Panic  among  the  Caribs  at  the  Pomeroon  Station — Its 
Abandonment. 

Waramuri  had  been  threatened  with  destruction  by- 
fire,  and  the  Indians  who  attended  it  had  been  scat- 
tered by  famine,  and  had  their  numbers  thinned  by 
dysentery.  Still,  notwithstanding  these  things,  the 
number  of  attendants  increased,  and  the  mutual  attach- 
ment between  the  missionary  and  his  flock  grew 
stronger  daily.  One  Sunday  thirty-three  canoes  full 
of  people  came,  besides  those  that  travelled  overland. 

But  the  malaria  from  the  cleared  swamp  had  affected 
the  health  of  the  mission  family,  in  which  unceasing 
sickness  and  prostration  prevailed. 

In  August  1846,  Mr.  Nowers's  youngest  child  died. 
The  father,  having  no  materials  of  which  to  construct 
a  coffin,  was  obliged  to  take  the  foot-boards  of  the 
mission  bateau.^     AVhile  burying   this  child,  the  life 

^  The  bateau  is  shaped  somewhat  like  an  Indian  canoe,  but 
built,  instead  of  being  hollowed  from  a  single  tree.  Like  the 
canoe,  it  has  no  keel. 


TRIALS.  189 

of  his  second  son  was  despaired  of.  This  was  followed 
by  a  violent  illness,  which  attacked  both  parents,  and 
compelled  their  removal  to  the  Pomeroon,  where  the 
family  remained  in  a  languishing  state  till  the  end  of 
the  year.  Mr.  Nowers  partially  recovered  ;  but  his 
complaint  rendered  him  unal^le  to  bear  the  climate, 
and,  as  the  health  of  his  family  did  not  improve,  he 
was  compelled  to  resign  his  mission.  After  erecting 
a  wooden  slab  bearing  a  simple  inscription  at  the  head 
of  the  grave  of  the  departed  infant,  and  surrounding 
it  with  a  rail,  an  affectionate  leave  was  taken  of  the 
people,  and  Waramuri  quitted  on  the  21st  of  Decem- 
ber, to  the  great  grief  of  alL 

.  As  we  were  embarking,  a  young  Carib  presented 
himself  mth  his  paddle  in  his  hand,  and  his  hammock 
over  his  shoulder,  and  offered  his  services  as  a  paddler. 
On  being  told  that  our  crew  was  complete,  he  still 
persisted  in  requesting  a  passage,  which  was  granted. 

The  weather  was  unsettled  and  stormy  at  that  sea- 
son. In  passing  over  the  sea,  we  encountered  three 
furious  squalls,  which  continued  for  an  hour  and  a 
half.  We  were  unable  to  bring  the  boat  round,  as  she 
would  have  instantly  filled  if  exposed  broadside  to  the 
waves,  which  broke  over  her  bows  in  rapid  succession. 
Om-  tent  was  cut  away,  and  Mr.  Nowers  and  an  Indian 
engaged  during  the  whole  time  in  baling  out  the  water 
with  a  bucket  and  a  large  calabash.  The  shore  Avas 
near,  but  unsafe ;  and  we  were  unable  from  the  rain 
and  spray  of  the  sea  to  see  more  than  a  few  yards  of 
tossing  waves  around  us.  While  the  steersman  Avas 
striving  to  keep  her  head  to  the  wind,  his  large  paddle 


190  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

broke  short ;  but  we  fortunately  bad  a  spare  one  on 
board,  which  was  immediately  handed  to  him. 

When  the  weather  cleared  we  found  that,  notwith- 
standing our  crew  had  strained  every  nerve,  we  were 
still  in  the  same  spot  in  which  the  first  squall  had 
met  us.  We  were  now  thankful  to  God  for  our 
additional  hand,  which  had  enabled  us  to  maintain 
the  struggle. 

On  reaching  the  mouth  of  the  Pomeroon  we  saw  a 
schooner,  which  had  been  caught  by  the  same  storm, 
and  driven  across  the  mud-flat  nearly  into  the  forest, 
although  she  had  dropped  her  anchor.  The  master 
said  he  hoped  to  get  off  next  tide,  which  happened 
accordingly.  Another  schooner  belonging  to  the  same 
person  was  sunk  in  her  next  voyage,  all  on  board  being 
drowned  except  two  hands.  In  this  vessel  were  lost 
most  of  Mr.  Nowers's  goods,  which  had  been  removed 
from  Waramuri.  He  thus  had  sorrow  upon  sorrow ; 
and  continued  ill-health  compelled  him  to  depart  for 
England.  The  Indians,  by  whom  he  was  greatly 
beloved,  inquired  continually  whether  "Noa"  would 
not  soon  come  again. 

We  must  now  relate  the  course  of  events  in  the 
Pomeroon.  The  Indian  women  there  had,  by  my 
marriage  some  time  before,  obtained  for  the  first 
time  the  valuable  services  of  a  teacher  of  their  own 
sex,  whose  life  was  about  this  time  nearly  cut  short 
by  a  sudden  danger. 

Some  young  Indian  men,  in  an  open  space  at  the 
back  of  the  mission  house,  were  testing  their  strength 
by  discharging  arrows  from  their  powerful  bows  per- 


TRIALS.  191 

pendicularly  into  the  air.  One  of  their  largest  arrows 
(of  the  kind  used  for  killing  the  tapir),  ascending  to  a 
great  height,  was  caught  by  an  upper  current  of  air,  and 
carried  over  the  house,  which  Ave  were  just  leaving 
at  the  summons  to  evening  prayer.  The  arrow  in 
its  lightning-like  descent  ahnost  grazed  the  head  of 
Mrs.  Brett,  and  suddenly  arrested  her  steps,  with  its 
feathered  end  quivering  against  her  shoulder,  and  its 
spear-headed  iron  point  buried  some  inches  deep  in  the 
earth  at  her  feet.  It  was  a  moment  of  sudden  terror, 
where  all  had  been  peace  and  apparent  safety ;  for  her 
life  (under  God)  had  depended  on  one  inch  of  space, 
or  one  second  of  time.  Our  thankfulness  was  fully 
shared  by  the  Indians  around,  and  equalled  by  the 
regret  of  the  young  fellows  for  the  carelessness  which 
had  so  nearly  caused  a  fatal  accident. 

The  people  of  this  river  suftered  less  during  the 
famine  than  the  improvident  Waraus  ;  having  had  a 
better  stock  of  provisions,  and  taken  care  to  replant 
their  fields  as  soon  as  they  saw  "the  sun  kill"  the 
first  crop. 

But  depredations  were  frequently  committed  by 
parties  who,  having  been  the  dupes  of  the  great  im- 
posture, had  neglected  their  own  fields,  and  were  noAV 
destitute  of  provisions  on  their  return.  A  report 
reached  us  that  two  Acawoios  had  been  killed  by 
Caril^s,  who  had  detected  them  in  the  act  of  robl)ing 
their  fields,  in  a  distant  part  of  the  country.  This 
and  other  circumstances,  whether  true  or  not,  seemed 
to  threaten  a  feud.  The  dysentery  had  also  visited 
the    Indians   in    Pomeroon,    but    was     chiefly    fatal 


192  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

when  it  attacked  children,  many  of  whom  died,  but 
few  adults. 

In  March  1847,  an  occurrence  took  place  which 
exhibited  a  new  feature  in  Indian  life.  The  mission 
was,  as  usual,  in  a  state  of  the  greatest  tranquillity, 
when  Commodore,  the  Caribi  chief,  came  thither  to 
reside,  with  his  son  and  family,  for  protection.  He 
had  built  a  large  house  in  front  of  our  Caribi  village 
for  the  accommodation  of  himself  and  family  on  the 
Sabbath,  and  planted  a  tall  flag-staff  before  it  as  a 
symbol  of  his  rank  ;  but  during  the  week  he  usually 
lived  at  his  settlement  in  the  forest.  The  latter  he 
now  quitted,  as  he  said,  in  consequence  of  having  dis- 
covered that  a  strong  party  of  Acawoios,  painted  and 
equipped  for  war,  were  lurking  near  it.  I  thought  but 
little  of  the  circumstance,  as  the  Indians  generally  had 
been  in  a  very  unsettled  state  ever  since  the  unhappy 
migration.  The  family  had  with  them  a  young  man, 
who  had  taken  to  wife  a  heathen  daughter  of  the  old 
chief.  He  was  a  stranger  from  a  distant  part,  and 
was  noted  for  never  moving  from  the  house  without  a 
short-barrelled  gun  in  his  hand. 

After  the  services  of  the  following  Sunday  were 
concluded,  we  were  disturbed  about  nine  in  the 
evening  by  a  loud  outcry  proceeding  from  the  Caribi 
portion  of  the  village.  While  we  were  doubting  as 
to  the  cause.  Commodore's  son  and  another  young 
man  came  in  a  hurried  manner  to  summon  me, 
bearing  torches  and  cutlasses  in  their  hands.  They 
declared  that  the  Acawoios  were  upon  them,  and 
had   struck   down   the   young   stranger.     Proceeding 


TRIALS.  193 

to  the  spot,  I  found  the  young  man  writhing  in  his 
hammock,  apparently  in  great  pain  from  a  blow  on 
his  thigh.  The  women  were  crying  around  him  in 
a  frantic  manner,  and  the  whole  village  was  in  an 
uproar,  every  man  getting  his  weapons  to  defend 
himself  and  family.  With  great  difficulty  I  learned 
that  the  young  man,  who  had  gone  some  little 
distance  from  the  houses,  had  seen  an  Acawoio 
approaching  behind  him  from  the  forest,  and  had 
suddenly  tm^ned  and  sprung  upon  him,  throwing 
his  arms  around  him,  but  had  been  hurled  to  the 
ground  by  the  superior  strength  of  his  enemy,  and 
received  a  random  blow  as  he  fell,  the  Acawoio 
escaping  into  the  forest,  as  the  cry  for  assistance 
was  raised  and  answered. 

Nothing  could  exceed  the  panic  of  the  women 
and  children,  and  the  men  were  all  asking  what  they 
should  do.  It  seemed  best  to  tell  them  to  assemble 
outside  the  chief's  house,  while  the  women  and  chil- 
dren should  keep  inside.  This  they  did,  but  the  con- 
fusion was  great,  the  house  being  quite  full,  and  some 
of  the  females  crying,  others  laughing  hysterically, 
and  many  talking  with  great  vehemence  at  the 
same  time. 

At  this  moment,  the  wife  of  the  young  man  ran 
into  the  midst  of  us,  crying  out  that  a  man  was 
concealed  ^behind  a  bush  near  the  house.  Imme- 
diately every  gun  was  pointed  in  that  direction, 
and  some  of  the  Caribs  began  to  spread  themselves 
around,  gliding  close  to  the  ground,  with  their 
pieces  cocked  and  advanced,  ready  to  be  discharged 

0 


194  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

at  the  slightest  motion.  The  night  was  very  dark, 
but  many  torches  were  blazing  around,  and  the 
young  woman  before  mentioned  rushed  wildly  for- 
ward with  the  men,  whirling  a  blazing  firebrand 
to  give  them  additional  light. 

A  low  cry  was  now  heard  close  at  hand,  Avhich 
was  answered  from  a  distance.  The  Caril3s  exclaimed, 
"  Acawoio !"  and  became  exasperated,  I  then  de- 
sired young  Commodore  to  tell  them  all  to  stop  and 
listen.  This  arrested  them,  and  he  then  interpreted, 
that  "  even  if  they  should  kill  an  Acawoio,  they 
would  make  bad  worse,  and  the  blood  feud  would 
never  end.  If  enemies  Avere  there  at  all,  they  were 
probably  few,  and  unprovided  with  fire-arms,  and 
the  Post-holder  should  be  instantly  sent  for,  who 
when  he  came  would  settle  the  matter  between  their 
tribes  in  a  peaceable  and  Christian  manner." 

The  messengers  were  accordingly  sent,  and  the 
Caribs  satisfied  themselves  with  posting  guards 
outside  the  house  till  morning. 

I  then  went  to  see  the  state  of  the  Arawdks,  one 
of  the  Caribs  running  after  me  with  a  torch  (which 
I  had  forgotten),  lest  I  should  have  been  shot  by 
mistake  in  the  dark.  It  was  no  needless  precaution, 
for  each  Arawak  had  his  gun  prepared,  having  heard 
the  sound  in  the  forest,  which  they  said  was  the 
voice  of  men.  No  woman  went  to  the  water  that 
night  unless  attended  by  her  husband,  who  carried 
his  cutlass  and  a  blazing  firebrand.  Many  tales  were 
afloat  to  account  for  an  attack  of  the  Acawoios, 
which  seemed  to  have  been  expected  for  some  time 


TRIALS.  195 

before.  Most  of  our  people  tliouglit  that  they  were 
a  party  from  Cuyiuii,  or  from  Masariuii,  sent  hy  the 
impostor  there  to  attack  our  mission. 

The  next  morning  young  Commodore  with  a  party 
of  his  men  scoured  the  forest  in  liopes  of  discovering 
the  Acawoios,  and  entering  into  a  parley.  They  re- 
turned without  success,  having  only  found  a  small 
basket  of  Acawoio  manufacture. 

On  the  second  morning  the  Post-holder  arrived 
from  his  house  at  the  mouth  of  the  Pomeroon,  havins' 
travelled  all  night.  We  went  together  towards  the 
head  of  the  river.  As  we  were  proceeding  on  the 
following  morning  up  the  beautiful  windings  of  the 
stream,  we  heard  a  low  whoop  from  the  high  bank 
above  us.  This  proceeded  from  France,  Commodore's 
brother,  who  had  quitted  his  settlement,  and,  with 
his  two  wives  and  children,  was  going  to  seek 
shelter  among  his  heathen  relatives.  He  said  that 
a  woman  had  seen  two  Acawoios  in  a  field  not 
far  distant,  and  had  been  pursued  by  them  towards 
her  house.  All  the  people  in  that  part  were  in  a 
great  panic,  and  though  much  allowance  was  to  be 
made  for  excitement  and  exaggeration,  it  seemed 
certain  that  there  was  a  strong  party  lurking  in 
the  forests  with  no  good  intentions. 

It  afterwards  appeared  that  the  father  of  the 
young  Carib  who  had  been  assaulted  had,  two  years 
before,  been  assassinated  before  his  eyes,  and  that 
he,  having  discharged  an  arrow  at  the  men  who 
killed  him,  had  been  marked  out  to  be  put  to  death. 
Whether   he    considered    himself  as   bound  by  their 


196  THE  INDIAN  TBIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

fearful  custom  to  be  the  avenger  of  blood,  we  know 
not,  jjut  it  seemed  evident,  from  his  wild  manner, 
that  his  mind  was  affected  by  the  circumstances 
in  which  he  was  placed.  His  life  having  been 
attempted  in  the  Essequibo,  where  he  resided,  he 
fled  to  Pomeroon,  and  this  led  to  the  events  here 
related.  I  did  not  consider  his  presence  desirable 
at  the  mission,  and  recommended  him  to  seek 
employment  at  the  coast  on  one  of  the  sugar  estates, 
whither  his  enemies  would  not  be  able  to  follow 
him  with  any  prospect  of  success  in  their  mur- 
derous design. 

The  mission  again  became  quiet  as  before.  Never 
had  its  buildings  appeared  so  neat ;  and  all  the  paths 
which  led  to  the  different  parts  of  the  village  were 
kept  in  good  order,  and  bordered  with  lilies,  whose 
flowers  of  brilliant  scarlet  contrasted  beautifully 
with  their  dark  green  leaves. 

At  this  time  the  sad  news  of  the  famine  in  Ireland 
and  in  the  Highlands  of  Scotland  reached  us.  Collec- 
tions were  made  all  over  the  colony  for  the  relief  of 
the  sufferers.  The  subject  was  laid  before  the  Indians 
at  the  mission,  and  they  at  once  offered  to  contribute 
cassava  and  other  provisions,  for  the  relief  of  the 
hungry  people.  When  told  that  they  would  spoil  in 
their  passage  over  the  wide  sea,  they  said  that  they 
had  little  money,  as  the  drought  of  the  preceding  year 
had  reduced  them  to  penury,  and  their  clothes  were 
nearly  worn  out,  their  young  men  being  at  that  time 
absent  working  for  money  to  buy  more.  This  was  the 
truth,  as  I  knew. 


TRIALS.  197 

Cornelius  was  present,  and,  seeing  how  matters 
stood,  he  went  quietly  away.  He  had  just  returned 
from  the  sugar  estates,  bringing  with  him  aljout  ten 
dollars,  the  produce  of  his  industry,  with  which  he 
was  about  to  proceed  to  Georgetown  to  purchase 
clothes  for  his  family.  This  sum  he  brought  and  laid 
before  me.  Taking  one  dollar,  he  said,  "  I  give  this 
for  myself,  and  this,"  said  he,  adding  another,  "  for 
my  wife  and  eldest  daughter."  Then  turning  to  his 
countrymen,  he  continued,  "  Friends,  you  have  little 
money,  I  will  lend  you  from  this  till  it  is  gone,  and 
repay  me  when  you  are  able."  One  after  another 
availed  themselves  of  the  offer ;  others  rummaged  up 
a  little  more  ;  some  poor  old  widows  brought  their 
"  half-bits,"  (two-pence)  and  fifty-two  dollars  were  sent 
that  week  from  Pomeroon.  Half  of  that  sum  was 
collected  among  the  inhabitants  of  the  lower  district 
of  the  river. 

The  mission  at  Waramuri  was  then  lying  desolate, 
and  that  on  the  Pomeroon  was  about  to  share  its 
fate.  I  became  at  this  period  too  weak  to  con- 
tinue my  duties.  After  lingering  many  days,  T  was 
reluctantly  compelled  to  send  for  paddlers  to  convey 
me  to  the  sea-coast.  The  messenger  told  the  Indians 
whom  he  met,  and  the  news  spread  widely  along  the 
rivers  during  the  night.^     The  next  morning  before 

^  The  rapidity  ■with  which  news  spreads  over  an  Indian  district 
has  struck  others  as  well  as  myself.  !Mr.  M'Clintock  says  in 
reference  to  it,  "  Let  a  woman,  for  instance,  of  the  Caribi  tribe, 
be  injured,  and  a  report  to  that  effect  will  reach  the  ear  of  every 
Carib  throughout  the  district  in  almost  as  short  a  time  as  a 
pigeon  would  convey  it ;  and  as  the  report  of  the  injury  reaches 


198  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GVIANA. 

daybreak  we  heard  a  low  hum  of  voices  around  the 
mission  house.  It  was  the  himcnt  of  our  poor  people, 
some  of  whom  had  come  many  miles  through  the 
darkness,  and  brought  little  presents  of  pines  and 
other  fruits,  which  we  could  not  eat.  As  if  they 
had  not  previously  been  kind  enough  to  us,  or  we 
had  needed  gifts  to  induce  us  to  stay  ! 

Our  parting  need  not  be  described.  The  voyage 
was  very  sorrowful.  My  wife  and  new-born  infant 
beside  mc  were  both  suffering  greatly  from  the  want 
of  medical  aid,  and  when  at  times  I  raised  my  head 
I  saw  that  Cornelius,  who  steered,  could  not  restrain 
his  tears,  which  ran  down  his  cheeks,  as  he  silently 
looked  on  us  and  thought  he  saw  in  our  departure 
the  ruin  of  his  hopes  for  his  people's  good. 

Several  months  elapsed.  At  length  I  was  enal^led 
to  pay  a  monthly  visit  of  several  days  to  the  mission. 
But  in  May  1849,  increasing  debility  comj^elled  me  to 
return  to  England  ;  leaving,  with  deep  regret,  both 
stations  vacant. 

To  that  at  Waramuri  Mr.  Currie  was  soon  after  sent 
as  catechist ;  but  he  too  was  in  about  a  year  disabled 
by  sickness,  and  compelled  to  leave,  having  lost  his 
wife  and  child  a  few  months  before. 

Eepeated  afflictions  of  that  kind  seemed  likely  to 
compel  the  final  abandonment  of  that  station,  Avhich 
was  far  beyond  the  reach  of  medical  aid. 

We  knew  that  in  such  a  case  the  verdant  forest 
would  soon  cover  the  place  where  stood  the  house  of 

them,  every  in;ui  makes  ready  on  tlio  instant  to  defend  or  aid,  not 
at  his  own  place,  bnt  at  the  abode  of  tlic  injured  person.'' 


TIUALS.  199 

prayer,  and  where  the  departed  members  of  the  mission 
families  await  the  resurrection  morn.  But  we  l^new 
also  that  the  story  of  the  mission  at  Waramuri  would 
not  be  soon  forgotten  ;  but  that  the  Indian  fathers 
■would  point  to  that  hill  with  its  mysterious  mound, 
and  tell  their  cliildren  of  the  hundreds  of  men  who 
assembled  and  cleared  that  extent  of  ground,  and 
willingly  assisted  in  building  a  place  of  worship  where 
themselves  and  families  might  be  taught  the  religion 
of  the  Lord  Jesus. 

A  dark  cloud  now  hung  over  the  sister  missions. 
During  its  continuance  we  could  only  exercise  faitli  in 
the  divine  promises,  and  pray  that  He  whose  religion 
we  had  feebly  endeavoured  to  plant  amidst  those  dense 
forests  and  marshy  savannahs  would  yet "  look  down 
from  heaven,  behold  and  visit  that  vine." 


CHAPTER  XIII. 


MAHATCONI. 


Siti;ation   of  the  Maliaiconi — Expedition  in  1844 — Great  Indian 
Assembly  and  Maquarri  Dance — Eesult — Gloomy  Prosjiects. 

The  events  related  in  the  foregoing  pages  occurred 
near  the  western  boundary  of  the  province.  That 
which  we  will  now  briefly  notice  took  place  in  the 
Indian  country  between  the  Demerara  and  the  Berbice  ; 
where  there  are  three  smaller  rivers,  the  Mahaica,  the 
Maliaiconi,  and  the  Abari. 

The  Arawaks  of  that  district,  having  heard  of  the 
change  among  their  western  brethren,  made  applica- 
tion for  a  Christian  teacher  to  be  placed  among  them- 
selves. Accordingly,  in  A})ril  1844,  the  Bishop  visited 
those  streams,  taking  me  with  him. 

AVe  first  ascended  the  IMahaica,  and  found  only 
forty-one  Indians.  We  next  proceeded  to  examine 
the  Maliaiconi  :  the  Post-holder  of  that  district,  Mr. 
Hancock,  accompanying  us  in  a  bateau  with  four  black 
rowers.  A  large  canoe  was  in  attendance,  containing 
ten  Arawaks,  a  deputation  from  the  JMahaiconi  clan, 
who  had  come  to  meet  us. 


MAEAICOm.  201 

The  wcatlicr  was  fine,  and  the  river  scenery,  tlioiigh 
confined,  extremely  pleasant.  Many  parrots  and 
macaws  were  flying  above  iis,  or  seated  among  the 
branches  of  the  trees  on   both  sides  of  the  stream. 

Having  biv^ouacked  in  the  forest  from  3  a.m.  until 
9,  we  again  set  forward,  and  after  rowing  some  miles, 
our  party  landed  and  proceeded  on  foot  through  the 
forest,  leaving  the  bateau  in  charge  of  the  crew,  the 
principal  man  of  whom  bore  the  name  of  Bacchus.^ 

About  noon  we  got  clear  of  the  forest,  and  entered 
on  a  large  plain.  At  a  distance  appeared  an  Indian 
village,  the  principal  settlement  of  the  Araw4ks.  As 
we  drew  near,  the  singular  and  well-remembered  shouts 
of  the  assembled  Indians  told  that  they  were  all  engaged 
in  a  grand  Maquarri  dance,  similar  to  that  which  I  had 
witnessed  in  the  Koraia,  and  of  which  an  account  has 
been  given. 

There  vvere  about  two  hundred  Indians  present. 
Most  of  the  men  were  dancing,  having  their  faces 
painted  red  in  various  patterns,  and  their  heads 
adorned,  some  with  coronals  of  feathers,  and  others 
Vvdth  the  white  down  of  birds.  Beads  in  great  abund- 
ance, and  the  shining  cases  of  the  wings  of  beetles, 
which  glittered  in  the  sunlight,  and  rattled  as  they 

^  The  names  of  the  gods  and  goddesses,  lierocs  and  tyrants,  of 
classic  antiquity,  were  given  to  the  negroes  in  their  days  of  heathen- 
ism and  slavery.  One  of  our  paddlers  on  the  INIahaica  was  Apollo. 
I  have  had  the  honour  of  being  conveyed  in  a  small  canoe  by 
Jupiter  and  Vulcan.  African  names,  as  Qtt((f>/ti,  Cudjo,  Amba, 
AJjuha,  &c.,  and  those  of  modern  warriois  and  statesmen,  were 
mingled  with  the  above,  sometimes  presenting  strange  combina- 
tions, as  Adonis  Bob,  Cupid  Tcjby,  &c. 


202  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

danced,  were  added  to  their  otlier  showy  and  fantastic 
ornaments.  The  females  were  quietly  looking  on, 
being  seated  on  the  ground  under  a  large  house, 
where  on  a  raised  stand  was  placed  a  canoe  full  of 
paiwari. 

There  was  a  wild  beauty  in  the  whole  scene,  mingled 
with  much  that  in  our  eyes  was  grotesque  and  alisurd, 
A  drunken  festival  was  a  singular  preparation  for  the 
reception  of  Christianity,  and  a  strange  mode  of  wel- 
coming a  Bishop.  It  was  indeed  the  besb  way  they 
could  think  of  to  show  their  good-will,  but  the 
absurdity  reached  its  climax  when  one  of  their  leaders 
apologetically  said,  "  If  we  had  known  sooner  that  the 
Bishop  was  coming  to  see  us,  we  should  have  been 
better  prepared  for  him  ;  and  two  canoes  of  j)aiwari 
would  have  been  made  instead  of  one." 

We  were  glad,  however,  to  find  that  they  were 
still  sober,  the  entertainment  having  but  just  com- 
menced. 

Their  chief,  named  Swey,  was  lying  sick  in  his 
hammock.  While  the  Bishop  was  visiting  him,  I 
requested  the  dancers  to  desist.  They  did  so  imme- 
diately, and  assembled  in  the  large  house.  The  men 
as  they  entered  laid  their  whips  (which,  in  their  ideas, 
have  a  sort  of  sacred  character)  on  a  board  placed  for 
that  purpose.  They  then  seated  themselves  in  rows, 
with  the  women  and  children  ranwd  behind  them, 
and  silently  awaited  the  address  of  the  Bishop. 

The  object  of  our  visit  was  then  explained,  and  the 
main  doctrines  of  Christianity  set  before  them.  They 
were  also  kindly  reminded  of  the  natural  consequences 


^  MAHAICONl.  203 

of  some  of  their  lieatlien  practices,  especially  of  their 
drunken  festivals.  They  were  much  moved  when  this 
j^art  of  the  Bishop's  address  was  interpreted ;  some 
instances  of  murder  and  suicide  having  lately  occurred 
among  them,  the  effects  of  intoxication. 

An  animated  discussion  ensued.  AYe  had  two 
Christian  Arawaks  with  us,  each  of  whom  was  sur- 
rounded by  a  throng  of  the  late  JMaquarri  dancers. 
The  latter  eagerly  asked  when  a  teacher  would  come 
to  live  with  them. 

When  we  took  leave  of  them  it  was  near  night, 
and,  as  the  forest  path  would  have  been  difficult  and 
dangerous,  the  Bishop,  myself,  and  three  Indians 
embarked  in  a  canoe.  It  was  so  small  and  "  crank  " 
that  the  whole  party  were  ol^liged  to  sit  on  small 
pieces  of  wood  laid  in  the  bottom.  In  this  manner 
we  proceeded,  groping  along,  as  it  were,  in  the 
increasing  darkness,  for  about  two  hours,  when  we 
reached  a  wider  stream.  The  moon  then  rose,  and 
by  her  light  we  siiw  the  bateau.  Bacchus  had 
kindled  a  fire  on  the  shore,  and  provided  for  us  a 
meal,  of  which  we  were  all  in  great  need.  At  three 
the  next  morning  we  went  on  our  way  down  the 
river. 

The  result  of  this  visit  was  the  establishment  of 
a  station  among  the  Arawaks  who  inhabit  those 
savannahs.  Mr.  Berry  was  the  first  teacher.  In 
1846  he  was  succeeded  by  ]Mr.  S.  Manning,  who 
Avas  compelled  by  severe  illness  to  leave  in  less 
than  two  years.  At  that  time  nearly  all  our  Indian 
stations,    so    prosperous    a    little    before,    were    in    a 


204  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

state  of  abandonment  on  account  of  the  sickness  of 
tlieir  teachers. 

It  was  also  a  very  gloomy  period  for  the  colony  at 
large.  Cuba  and  other  slave  countries  had  seen,  with 
joyful  surprise,  the  British  nation  (a  few  years  after 
sweeping  slavery  from  their  own  colonies)  freely 
opening  their  markets  to  slave-grown  sugar.  To 
avail  themselves  to  the  fullest  extent  of  tlie  advan- 
tage thus  offered  to  the  slave  owners,  a  largely 
increased  consumption  of  African  flesh  and  blood 
was  needed ;  and  this  was  being  rapidly  supplied  by 
vessels  built  expressly  for  that  nefarious  traffic,  and 
well  fitted  in  size  and  swiftness  to  escape  our 
cruisers.  ^ 

On  the  other  hand,  our  planters,  whose  sugar  was 
raised  by  free  and  paid  labour,  had  been  much  de- 
pressed. A  very  large  number  of  fine  estates  had  been 
sold,  others  abandoned.  Those  who  had  been  able  to 
survive  the  crisis  were  struggling  hard,  by  improved 
machinery,  agricultural  chemistry,  and  by  the  ener- 
getic expedient  of  bringing  labourers  from  the  other 
side  of  the  earth,  to  keep  up  their  cultivation,  most 
of  which  would  otherwise  have  disappeared.  But  it 
was  impossible,  under  those  circumstances,  to  keep 
up  the  rate  of  wages  demanded  by  the  emancipated 
labourers.  Crime,  especially  incendiarism,  was  very 
prevalent  in  the  colony  at  that  time. 

Our  Indian   stations   seemed  to   share  the  general 

^  Some  of  those  slavers,  new  vessels,  and  remarkable  for  tlieir 
"beautiful  lines  and  complete  equipment,  were  captured  and  brought 
to  Demerara  about  that  time. 


MAHAICONI.  20.5 

depression,  tliougli  from  a  different  cause.  Perhaps, 
encouraged  by  the  success  which  had  attended  our 
later  efforts,  we  had  begun  to  look  on  that  success 
almost  as  a  matter  of  course,  not  sufficiently  regard- 
ing Him  who  alone  giveth  the  increase.  Then,  rapidly, 
.teacher  after  teacher  sank  disabled,  and,  at  the  time, 
it  seemed  doubtful  if  some  of  our  stations  would 
ever  revive. 

"  Not  by  might,  nor  by  power,  but  by  My 
Spirit,"  was  the  lesson  which  those  adversities  seemed 
sent  to  teach  us. 


PAET  II. 


CHAPTER   I. 

INCIDENTS    or   CARIBI    LIFE. 

State  of  the  Caribs  in  1851 — Visits  to  their  Head-quarters — In- 
cidents— Child  kiUed  by  a  Cougar — Caribi  Man  devoured 
by  a  Jaguar — Subsequent  Visits — Quashinikotahpo — Mora-tree 
Bridge — Impediments  to  ^Navigation — The  Slayer  of  Jaguars — 
An  Acawoio  Clan  from  a  distant  Eiver  join  us. 

We  resume  our  narrative  with  the  latter  part  of  the 
year  1851.  At  that  period  matters  had  become  some- 
what more  promising  as  regarded  the  prosperity  of 
the  colony.  Renewed  eflbrts  were  also  being  made  for 
the  advancement  of  the  aborigines.  Bartica  ^  was  flou- 
rishing, and  other  stations  were  progressing  favourably. 
But  those  in  the  great  Indian  district  with  which 

^  Bartica  was  at  that  time  under  the  joint  care  of  the  Eev. 
Messrs.  Bernau  and  Lohrer,  though  soon  to  lose  the  services 
of  those  good  men,  by  the  death  of  the  latter  and  the  departure 
of  the  former.     The  Eev.  Mr.  Hillis  succeeded  them. 

The  influx  of  settlers  of  other  races,  and  the  establislment  of 
a  large  penal  settlement  on  the  Masaruni  in  its  neighbourhood, 
gradually  deprived  Bartica  of  its  original  character  as  a  purely 
Indian  mission.  Many  of  the  Christian  Indians  left  it  to  reside 
in  more  secluded  districts,  carrying  -with  them  the  knowledge  they 
had  acquired.  One  of  them,  whom  I  accidentally  met  long  after, 
showed  me  letters  Avell  written  in  English,  which  he  had  received 
from  his  sisters  (pure  Arawaks  like  himself,  who  Avere  then  in 
England),  with  the  photographic  carte  de  vidte  of  one  of  them. 

P 


210  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

I  had  been  connected  were  much  depressed.  They 
had  lain  desolate  more  than  two  years,  during  which 
period  lingering  sickness  had  detained  me  in  England. 

On  my  return,  the  Bishop,  wishing  to  keep  up  my 
connexion  with  a  district  in  which  my  state  of  health 
no  longer  allowed  me  to  reside  permanently,  placed 
me  in  charge  of  the  parish  of  the  Holy  Trinity,  of 
which  that  district  was  nominally  a  part.  I  was  thus 
enabled  to  visit  at  short  intervals  the  people  among 
whom  I  had  lived  long  and  happily. 

The  first  of  those  visits  was  with  the  Bishop.  ^Ve 
found  AVaramuri  totally  abandoned,  and  in  a  state  of 
perfect  ruin  and  desolation,  in  which  it  remained 
several  years  longer. 

At  Cabacaburi  we  found  a  large  number  of  Arawaks 
under  a  new  teaclier — Mr.  Landroy.  There  were  also 
many  Caribs  present.  Some  of  these  latter  were 
living  as  Christians,  but  others  had  fallen  av^ay 
during  the  years  in  which  they  had  been  as  sheep 
not  having  a  shepherd. 

The  wives  of  some  who  had  been  catechumens  in 
former  years,  significantly,  and  as  one  means  of 
showing  their  condition,  pointed  to  their  tattered 
and  scanty  garments  as  we  passed,  and  said,  "Look 
on  these ! "  They  spoke  regretfully  of  the  decent 
apparel  which  their  husbands  had  worked  to  procure 
for  them  when,  a  few  years  before,  the  summons  to 
embrace  Christianity  had  first  reached  their  ears. 

We  were  much  moved  at  those  signs  of  retro- 
gression ;  and,  as  there  was  great  need  for  exertion 
among  them,  the  Bishop  resolved  to  accompany  me 


INCIDENTS  OF  CABIBI  LIFE.  211 

to  their  "country,"  tlic  head  of  the  Pomeroon,  in 
the  course  of  the  following  year. 

At  the  appointed  time  we  visited  their  settlements 
on  the  Issororo  and  Upper  Pomeroon,  and  found  a 
laro-e  number  of  Caribs  assembled  to  meet  us  at  a 

o 

place  about  two  days'  paddle  from  Cabacaburi.  Most 
of  these  had  never  been  under  instruction,  and  were 
as  wild  and  savage  in  their  appearance  as  any  I  had 
seen  in  former  years — the  men  being  adorned  with 
their  bright  red  paint,  the  women  with  their  sapuru 
or  leg-bandages,  and  both  sexes  almost  naked. 

That  settlement  was  named  Touboondu,  from  the 
rocks  in  the  bed  of  the  stream,  "  toubo,"  in  the 
Caribi  tongue,  signifying  a  stone,  or  rock.  In  that 
district  they  are  numerous,  and  C[uite  unmixed  ^^th 
other  tribes.  It  may  be  considered  the  head-quarters 
of  the  remnant  of  their  nation,  which  here  awaits  its 
fate, — silent  extinction,  or  incorporation  with  other 
races  in  the  Church  of  Christ. 

We  spent  two  days  among  them,  having  prayers 
and  religious  instruction  morning  and  evening,  nsing 
as  interpreters  the  Christian  Caribs  who  formed  our 
crew.  At  night  we  were  much  incommoded  by  the 
want  of  sleeping-room,  there  being  eighty  persons  of 
both  sexes  who  had  to  swing  their  hammocks  in  three 
small  open  houses  or  sheds.  And  a  singular  scene 
those  houses  presented,  crowded  as  they  were  with 
so  many  ^dld-looking  Indians,  who  were  hanging 
around  us  in  rows  one  above  another,  the  lower 
ones,  after  their  manner,  dangling  their  naked  legs 
through   the   smoke   and    flickering    flame    of    their 

p  2 


212  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  CWIANA. 

numerous  fires,  and  all  seeming  to  enjoy  their 
position  immensely.  Of  course,  privacy  was  out  of 
the  question, — thirty  female  heads  rising  from  the 
hammocks  at  the  slightest  sound, — and  sleep  was 
equally  difficult  to  obtain,  since,  from  the  manner 
in  which  the  strained  beams  creaked  as  the  men 
and  women  got  out  from  time  to  time  to  replenish  the 
fires  beneath  them,  there  was  evidently  some  danger 
of  our  all  cominff  down  with  a  crash  together. 

o  O 

The  next  morning  we  sent  out  two  huntsmen,  who 
returned  in  the  afternoon  with  a  deer  and  an  acouri, 
also  two  birds — a  large  powis  and  a  maam.  Their 
good  fortune  made  a  feast  for  all,  and  our  Carib 
friends  were  soon  busy  cleaning,  cutting  up,  cooking, 
and  eating  in  every  direction ;  while  the  Bishop's 
faithful  old  black  servant.  Branch,  took  care  of  us. 
Towards  evening,  we  observed  that  most  of  the 
younger  men  had  washed  their  faces,  and  appeared 
less  ferocious.  It  must,  without  soap,  have  been  a 
difiicult  task,  and  in  spite  of  all  their  scouring  they 
could  not  entirely  get  rid  of  the  bright  vermilion 
pigment,  which  obstinately  clung  to  and  stiffened 
the  hair  on  their  foreheads. 

Although  so  wild  in  their  appearance,  those  Caribs 
manifested  much  good  feeling,  were  very  grateful  to 
us  for  our  visit,  and  on  our  departure  accompanied 
us  to  our  boat  with  many  kind  farewells. 

This  was  the  Bishop's  first  visit  to  the  Upper 
Pomeroon,  and  he  was  struck,  as  I  had  been,  with 
the  beauty  of  that  part  of  the  river,  and  the  mid 
magnificence  of  the  forest  through  which  it  fiows. 


INCIDENTS  OF  CABIBI  LIFE.  213 

The  banks  are  very  liigli,  and  crowned  with  timber 
trees  of  enormous  size,  which  are  interLaced  with 
bush-ropes  and  creepers  of  proportionate  magnitude, 
and  adorned  by  parasites  of  the  most  brilliant  colours. 
In  some  places  the  interlacing  vines  form  wide- 
spreading  leafy  curtains,  which  hang  from  the 
upper  branches  to  the  river's  bank,  and  stretch 
along  from  tree  to  tree,  as  if  to  screen  the  forest 
glades  from  the  fierce  rays  of  the  sun. 

Below,  the  stream  winds  in  a  most  singular  manner, 
and  is  very  rapid  in  the  rainy  season.  Sometimes,  as 
the  bank  wears  away,  rows  of  immense  trees,  Ijound 
together  by  bush-ropes,  are  precipitated  with  a  noise 
like  thunder  down  into  the  river,  turning  over  in 
their  fall.  In  one  of  my  early  voyages  I  found  the 
upper  part  of  the  river  obstructed  by  a  prodigious 
fall  of  that  kind,  but  being  in  a  very  small  canoe, 
with  two  or  three  careful  Indians,  we  were  enabled 
to  pass  close  to  the  bank,  under  the  roots  of  the 
trees,  which  rested  against  it  with  their  tops  sub- 
merged below.  This  required  most  delicate  steering, 
as  the  confined  current  was  rushing  rapidly  through, 
and  there  were  large  masses  of  loosened  earth  adhering 
to  and  resting  on  the  roots  overhead,  of  which  the 
slio-htest  concussion  would  have  brought  down  suf- 
ficient  to  sink  us.  During  this  voyage  of  the  Bishop, 
however,  we  met  with  no  such  obstruction,  the 
weather  being  dry  and  the  water  low. 

As  we  came  doA\Ti  the  river,  our  Caribi  paddlers 
paused  to  point  out  a  gloomy-looking  stream,  which 
had  been  the  scene  of  a  shocking  occurrence  a  short 


214  THE  INDIAN  TBIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

time  before.  There  was  tlieii  a  Caribi  family  living 
tliere,  some  little  cliildreii  belonging  to  wliicli  bad 
gone  into  tbe  water  to  batbe.  While  thus  engaged, 
their  attention  was  drawn  by  a  cry  from  the  youngest, 
a  fine  little  boy  whom  they  had  left  seated  at  the 
water-side,  and  looking  round  they  saw  that  a  deer- 
tiger  or  cougar,  which  had  been  attracted  by  their 
merry  noise  and  splashing,  had  come  behind  the 
poor  child,  and  was  standing  with  one  paw  on  his 
shoulder. 

The  elder  sister  and  a  brother,  while  screaming  for 
help,  attempted  bravely  to  drive  away  the  savage 
beast;  but  their  efforts  only  caused  it  to  seize  the 
poor  little  fellow's  head  with  its  powerful  jaws.  It 
was  a  moment  of  agony.  Their  father  was  absent, 
but  another  Carib,  who  was  near,  rushed  to  the 
spot,  followed  by  the  child's  mother  and  other 
females.  The  beast,  startled  at  this  sudden  increase 
in  the  number  of  its  assailants,  dropped  its  little 
victim,  whom  the  man  immediately  took  up  and 
gave  to  the  mother.  But  assistance  had  come  too 
late.  The  upper  part  of  the  head  ^yiis  nearly  torn 
off,  and  the  child  gave  his  last  struggle  as  his 
mother  received  him  into  her  arms. 

They  carried  the  body  into  the  house,  and  the  man 
went  off  to  fetch  the  child's  father.  When  night  set 
in,  the  disappointed  beast  came  back  to  claim  his 
prey,  raging  and  yelling  through  the  hours  of  dark- 
ness around  the  open  shed  which  formed  their 
dwelling.  No  man  was  present,  and  the  females 
had  great  difficulty  with  firebrands  and  shouting  in 


INCIDENTS  OF  CABIBI  LIFE,  215 

keeping  liim  oft'.  A  more  wretclied  niglit  we  can 
scarcely  conceive, — for  all,  especially  tlie  poor  motlicr  ! 
Welcome  must  the  liglit  of  morning  liavc  been,  wlicn 
the  savage  animal  retired,  and  the  father  of  the  slain 
infant  came  to  bmy  him. 

About  the  same  time  a  Caribi  man  in  a  more 
distant  part  was  killed  and  eaten  by  a  jaguar.  He 
had  gone  into  the  forest  to  procure  a  certain  kind 
of  bark,  in  which  the  Indians  roll  the  tobacco-leaf 
to  form  their  cigars,  and  did  not  return.  His  friends, 
searching  for  him,  found  on  the  second  day  his  foot- 
tracks,  and  those  of  a  very  large  jaguar  by  which  he 
had  evidently  been  beset.  Following  these  for  a  long 
way  in  anxious  suspense,  they  at  length  came  to  a 
spot  where  there  were  marks  of  a  conflict,  and  saw 
their  comrade's  bow  broken  on  the  ground.  Still  the 
man  had  apparently  had  other  weapons,  and  for  a 
time  beaten  ofi"  his  assaihant,  for  the  tracks  of  both 
passed  on. 

At  length  they  reached  the  scene  of  a  last  struggle. 
On  the  ground  lay  the  Indian's  knife,  which  he 
had  lashed  to  the  end  of  a  stick  as  a  kind  of 
lance,  but  it  had  been  loosened,  and  turned  aside 
ao'ainst  the  touo'h  hide  of  the  animal.  From  the 
marks  on  a  tree  it  was  evident  that  the  poor  fcjllow, 
in  dire  extremity  at  the  approach  of  niglit  and  the 
failm-e  of  his  weapons,  had  been  trying  to  climb  it, 
but,  ere  he  had  ascended  it  ten  feet,  the  jaguar  had 
sprung  after  him,  pulled  him  down,  and  torn  him 
in  pieces.  The  remains,  terribly  mangled,  and  half 
devoured,   lay   near.     One   of  the   two    Caribs   who 


21(>  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

found  the  body  afterwards  told  the  Bishop  and 
myself  of  the  sickness  which  came  over  him  at  the 
sight,  and  said  that  he  had  never  since  felt  secure, 
when  traversing  the  forest  with  only  his  knife,  bow, 
and  arrows. 

"  Tigers,"  as  the  settlers  call  them,  seemed  indeed 
at  that  period  more  numerous  and  daring  than  usual. 
As  we  that  evening  passed  Makasina,  the  Post-holder's 
residence,  we  saw  a  number  of  persons  at  the  water- 
side, and  were  informed  by  Mrs.  M'Clintock  that  an 
Indian  of  her  household  had  that  morning  shot  a 
"  deer-tiger."  The  skin,  newly  stripped  off,  was  held 
up  to  be  seen  by  us.  It  was,  exclusive  of  the  tail, 
about  as  long  as  the  Indian  who  held  it,  of  a  silvery 
red  colour,  without  spots  or  stripes  ;  and  we  saw  by 
the  holes  that  two  bullets  had  entered,  one  on  each 
side  of  the  spine. 

Ever  anxious  to  aid  personally  in  evangelizing  the 
Indians,  our  good  Bishop,  at  a  subsequent  period, 
revisited  with  me  the  Caribi  territory. 

That  voyage  was  not,  however,  so  propitious  as 
others  had  been.  A  heavy  squall  during  the  night 
had  caused  our  tent-boat  to  break  from  her  moorings 
at  the  mission,  and  in  the  morning  she  was  no- 
where to  be  seen.  The  Indians,  searching  in  their 
smaller  craft,  recovered  her  after  the  lapse  of  some 
hours,  and  we  started.  But  a  violent  storm  came 
on  soon  after — the  thunder  rolled,  and  the  lightning 
swept  the  river  around  us,  while  heavy  squalls  of 
wind  alternated  with  such  torrents  of  rain  as  are 
only  encountered  within  the  tropics.     Our  boat  was 


INCIDENTS  OF  CARIBI  LIFE.  217 

small  and  very  crank ;  and  we  found  tliat,  in  tlic 
hurry  occasioned  by  the  delay,  she  had  been  care- 
lessly laden,  with  light  packages  below  and  the 
heavier  ones  above,  so  that  we  had  much  difficulty 
in  keeping  her  from  being  capsized  as  the  heavy 
gusts  of  wind  caught  the  tent.  Our  men  were 
unable  to  paddle,  all  their  efforts  being  required  in 
trimming  the  boat.  Fortunately  we  drifted  near  the 
residence  of  the  Post-holder,  and  ran  in  till  the 
abatement  of  the  storm  enabled  us  to  re-arrange  our 
luggage.  But  as  the  weather  continued  very  threat- 
ening, at  the  Bishop's  suggestion  I  left  my  little 
son  (who  had  come  with  us  to  the  river  to  re-visit 
his  birth-place)  under  the  care  of  Mr.  M'Clintock, 
and  that  gentleman  having  lent  us  a  lighter  tent- 
covering,  we  went  on  more  safely  and  comfortably 
4;han  before. 

The  Caribi  settlement  we  were  now  to  visit  bears 
the  rather  singular  name  of  Quashinikotahpo.  Its 
principal  inhabitant  had  taken  the  name  of  Perry, 
from  a  gentleman  with  whom  he  had  lived  when 
a  boy.  He  was  an  attendant  at  the  mission,  and 
had  invited  us  to  his  house,  sending  also  a  messenger 
to  summon  his  heathen  neighbours  to  meet  us  there. 

We  landed  at  nightfall,  and  found  the  forest  path 
so  dark  that  we  had  to  be  led  by  Perry  and  his 
friends,  who  had  come  to  the  water-side  to  receive 
us.  As  we  were  thus  groping  our  way,  we  heard 
the  sound  of  running  water,  and  found  that  we  had 
to  cross  a  stream  on  the  trunk  of  a  laro;e  tree.  This, 
in  the  dark,  was  unpleasant  and  dangerous ;  but  the 


218  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GV I  AN  A. 

Indians  grasped  our  hands  firmly,  telling  us  to  feel 
our  way  and  hold  on  ivith  our  feet,  which  was, 
however,  not  quite  so  easy  for  us  with  shoes,  as  for 
themselves  who  wore  none.  The  water  seemed  by 
its  sound  to  be  flowing  over  a  rugged  bed  some 
twenty  feet  below,  and  we  were  glad  when  we  got 
over.  But  ere  we  could  congratulate  each  other,  we 
found  that  we  had  a  similar  stream  to  cross  on  the 
same  tree,  a  discovery  which  gave  us  more  surprise 
than  pleasure. 

When  we  were  at  length  safely  over  both,  an 
Indian  woman  came  down  a  hill  to  meet  us,  bearing 
a  blazing  fire-brand,  by  the  light  of  which  our  crew 
also  crossed  with  our  luggage  on  their  heads.  All 
then  went  up  to  the  house,  where,  after  prayers, 
we  gladly  swung  our  hammocks  for  repose. 

Early  the  next  morning  we  went  to  examine  the 
rustic  bridge,  and  found  that  what  had  seemed  two 
streams  was,  in  fact,  one  and  the  same,  which,  at 
some  distance,  takes  a  singular  bend  and  winds 
back  again.  Across  the  deep  bed  of  the  stream 
where  it  is  thus  doubled,  the  Indians  had  thi'own 
their  Ijridge,  by  felling  a  mora  so  lofty  as  to  in- 
clude both  portions  in  its  span.  "  I  measm^ed  the 
trunk  of  this  tree,  and  found  it  108  feet  from  the 
part  where  it  had  been  cut  to  that  where  its  loicest 
jjranch  had  grown.  A  noble  size ;  yet  there  seemed 
many  others  around  of  equal  magnitude  and  beauty 
in  those  calmly  majestic  forests. 

We  found  Perry,  with  the  other  Caribs,  busily 
cngao-ed    in   fixino;   lon<?   stakes    in    the    bed   of   the 


INCIDENTS  OF  CARIBI  LIFE.  219 

stream,  and  tying  a  hand-rail  with  busli-ropes  to 
their  tops,  for  our  convenience  in  re-crossing  their 
bridge.  This  we  had  not  asked  for  :  it  was  entirely 
the  suggestion  of  their  own  native  courtesy ;  and 
they  must  have  risen  at  earliest  dawn  to  set  about  it. 

"We  met  but  few  Indians  at  Quashinikotahpo,  some 
mistake  having  been  made  in  announcing  our  visit; 
and,  as  the  Bishop's  time  was  limited,  we  were  obliged 
to  depart,  after  exhorting  our  kind  host  and  his 
neighbours,  "  ^^'ith  full  purpose  of  heart  to  cleave 
uato  God,"  -^ 

On  our  return,  we  found  that  a  very  large  tree 
had  fiillcn  into  the  river  durins;  the  storm,  and  it 
now  completely  obstructed  our  passage,  reaching 
from  bank  to  bank.  This  caused  us  to  rest  on  our 
paddles  for  some  time.  As  we  could  not  venture  to 
haul  our  crank  boat  over  the  trunk,  against  which 
the  swift  stream  was  chafing  and  leaping,  and  the 
banks  were  too  steep  to  allow  of  our  landing,  one 
of  our  crew,  an  active  young  Carib,  stepped  on  the 
tree  with  an  axe,  and  proceeded  to  cut  it  through. 
The  weight  of  the  stream  assisting  him,  it  soon  gave 
way  with  a  crash,  and  as  we  darted  thi'ough  the 
opening,  we  picked  up  om'  Indian,  who  did  not 
even  lose  his  axe,  as  we  had  feared  he  would. 

Those  missionary  exjDcditions  were  not  without 
fruit  amono-  the  Caribs  :  but  the  o-reat  distance  the 

^  This  settlement  was  abandoned  hy  the  Indians  some  years 
after,  in  consequence,  Perry  told  me,  of  the  danger  to  his  children, 
of  falling  from  his  locally-famous  mora  bridge  mto  one  or  other 
portion  of  the  stream. 


220  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

people  had  to  tmvel,  and  tlie  heavy  labour  of 
paddling  up  the  stream  on  their  return  during  the 
wet  season,  with  the  scarcity  of  canoes,  all  conspired 
to  keep  them  from  visiting  our  station  with  that 
regularity  which  was  essential  to  their  progress  in 
Christianity,  We  found  several  whom  I  had  gathered 
and  taught  when  children,  in  the  early  days  of  the 
mission,  now  grown-up  men  and  women.  Some  of 
these  were  following  heathen  practices  :  one  in  par- 
ticular had  become  a  piai-man,  or  sorcerer.  I  shall 
not  soon  forget  his  look  of  shame  when  I  asked  him 
to  read  to  the  Bishop  a  portion  of  the  English  New 
Testament,  which  he  could  do  very  well. 

Others  gave  us  much  comfort,  and  were  the  means 
of  bringing  their  parents  to  the  knowledge  of  God. 

The  father  of  one  of  these,  a  man  named  "  France," 
the  chief  Carib  on  the  Issororo,  thus  became  one  of 
our  most  steady  converts.  He  was  a  man  of  con- 
siderable personal  strength  and  cool  courage,  of  which 
he  gave  a  remarkable  proof  about  the  time  of  the 
Bishop's  visit  narrated  above. 

He  was  one  day  in  his  field  with  a  little  dog 
playing  beside  him,  when  he  perceived  a  jaguar  at 
a  distance  watching  him.  The  beast  slunk  away 
when  observed,  and  as  the  man  had  no  gun  he  went 
quietly  on  with  his  work,  clearing  away  the  bush 
with  his  cutlass,  which  was  a  new  and  good  one. 
But  "  Kaikusi,"  as  the  Caribs  call  the  jaguar,  had 
marked  the  dog  at  least  for  his  prey,  and  only  re- 
treated to  execute  a  flank  march  through  the  bush 
and  come  unperceived  on  the  rear.     Having  effected 


INCIDENTS  OF  CARIBI  LIFE.  221 

this,  lie  crept  noiselessly  forward  and  sprang  upon 
the  dog,  which  was  instantly  killed.  The  Carib 
rushed  to  the  assistance  of  his  favourite,  causmg 
the  animal  to  relinquish  his  prey,  and  turn  to 
spring  upon  him  ;  hut  the  man  anticipated  the 
attack,  and  dashing  forward,  decided  the  contest  by 
a  single  blow,  which  buried  his  cutlass  deep  in  the 
jaguar's  skull.  The  skin  of  that  animal  came  into 
the  possession  of  a  friend  of  mine,  and  was  regarded 
with  unusual  interest,  the  only  wound  having  been 
the  long  gash  by  which  the  head  had  been  cloven 
down  to  the  nose. 

On  a  subsequent  occasion  the  same  Carib  had  a 
similar  encounter  with  another  of  those  animals, 
which  abound  in  that  quarter,  and  shivered  its  skull 
with  an  axe  with  which  he  was  going  to  fell  some 
trees.  His  countrymen  regarded  him  with  pride  on 
account  of  these  and  similar  exploits ;  but  he  him- 
self never  spoke  of  them  to  us,  unless  directly 
questioned  on  the  subject,  and  then  modestly  and 
without  boasting. 

While  our  labours  in  the  Pomeroon  were  during 
those  years  chiefly  directed  to  the  work  of  evange- 
lizing the  Caribs ;  with  somewhat  chequered  results, 
as  has  been  shown  ;  an  event  took  place,  which  caused 
considerable  uneasiness  for  a  time,  and  had  conse- 
quences of  some  importance.  This  was  the  arrival 
of  several  families  of  the  Acawoio  nation  ;  who,  to 
the  astonishment  of  all,  had  come  from  a  distance  of 
nearly  two  hundred  miles,  begging  to  be  received  as 
catechumens. 


222  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

As  tlie  general  character  of  that  nation  had  been 
very  bad,  the  other  tribes  telling  terrible  stories  of 
them  as  poisoners  and  night  murderers,  the  excitement 
at  the  mission  was  not  small.  Most  of  our  other 
Indians  thought  that  their  days  were  numbered  if 
those  strangers  were  to  be  admitted  among  them ; 
and  Mr.  Landroy  and  his  family,  remembering  the 
fate  of  Mr.  Youd,  the  missionary  on  the  Essequibo 
(who,  with  his  wife,  had  been  poisoned  by  an  old 
man  of  that  tribe),  were  not  free  from  aj^prehen- 
sion.  But  Mr.  M'Clintock,  who  knew  the  people, 
gave  them  a  letter  of  recommendation,  and  as  I 
desired  that  they  might  be  received,  they  were  so, 
though  it  was,  so  to  speak,  with  fear  and  trembling. 

The  result  of  the  coming  of  those  Acawoios  must 
be  reserved  to  a  subsequent  chapter.  It  is  sufficient 
here  to  say  that  they  justified  the  confidence  reposed 
in  them ;  and  that  in  Christian  faith  and  practice 
those  strangers,  whose  coming  was  in  no  respect  due 
to  us,  and  whose  motives  were  regarded  with  such 
suspicion,  soon  surpassed  many  of  those  whom  we 
had  sought  with  long  and  painful  labour  to  gather 
into  the  Church  of  Christ.  Good  is  the  lesson  taught 
in  Holy  "Writ : — 

"  Thou  knowest  not  the  works  of  God  who 
maketh  all. 

"In  the  morning  sow  thy  seed,  and  in  the  even- 
ing withhold  not  thine  hand,  for  thou  knowest  not 
whether  shall  prosper,  either  this  or  that,  or  whether 
they  both  shall  be  alike  good." 


CHAPTER  II. 


EPIDEMIC    DISEASES. 


Mortality  from  Epidemics :  Small-pox,  Measles,  c^'c. — The  "Carihi," 
"  Buck,"  or  Imliau  Sickness — Destructive  Visit  of  Cholera — 
Diminished  Xumbers, 

The  numbers  of  the  Indian  races  have  been  periodi- 
cally thinned  by  epidemic  diseases.  Some  of  these 
visitations  have  been  already  noticed. 

Small-pox,  which  had  raged  in  1841,  returned  in 
1854,  and  carried  off"  many  whom  we  had  not  been 
able  to  vaccinate.  This  was  followed  by  measles. 
The  number  attacked  was  very  large.  Few  died  at 
the  missions,  where  remedies  were  used,  and  the  sick 
were  nursed  and  prevented  from  bathing  in  the  rivers, 
as  an  Indian  always  will  if  able  to  crawl  from  liis 
hammock.  A  long  drought  and  scarcity  of  food  in- 
creased their  liability  to  sickness. 

In  the  year  1856  the  ranks  of  our  Arawaks  were 
further  thinned  by  a  sore  disease,  an  endemic,  known 
by  the  name  of  the  "  Caribi  (or  Indian)  sickness." 
As  it  is  chiefly  confined  to  the  aborigines,  few  medical 
men   have  witnessed  it ;   but  it  is  really  one  of  the 


224  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

most  friglitful  and  deadly  scourges  wliich  affect  the 
Indian  tribes.  It  is  highly  infectious,  and  when  it 
seizes  a  person  eats  its  way  upwards  through  the 
rectum  and  other  intestines  till  the  sufferer  dies. 
There  are  various  remedies  in  the  early  stage,  which 
may  save  the  patient  ;  but  as  the  Indians,  from 
false  modesty,  object  to  the  necessary  mode  of 
their  application,  they  seldom,  when  stricken,  will 
divulge  the  presence  of  the  disease,  until  it  is  too 
late.  They  silently  pine  and  droop,  until  they  sink 
down  in  the  last  stage,  from  which  there  is  no 
recovery. 

This  terrible  disease  had,  indeed,  been  no  stranger 
to  us  before ;  but  it  now  broke  out  with  unexampled 
violence  among  our  Arawaks,  having  been  brought 
from  the  Demerara  to  the  Pomeroon  by  a  family  of 
that  tribe.  Its  severity  may  be  seen  by  the  following 
instance : — 

Among  the  persons  seized  was  a  man  called 
Cabouca  Thomas  and  his  family.  They  came  in 
their  canoe,  in  a  most  deplorable  condition,  to  the 
residence  of  the  Post-holder ;  and  Mrs.  M'Clintock, 
with  true  Christian-womanly  compassion,  received  and 
nursed  them,  using  every  effort  to  save  their  lives. 
It  was  in  vain ;  the  whole  family  died,  with  the  excep- 
tion of  one  child.  The  victims  were  ten  in  number, 
five  being  communicants  at  the  mission.  These  sad 
events,  being  rapidly  followed  by  the  lamented  death 
of  Mrs.  M'Clintock,  and  the  dangerous  illness  of  her 
husband,  our  good  Post-holder,  greatly  alarmed   the 


EPIDEMIC  DISEASES.  l!:25 

Caribs.  Some  of  tliem  went  into  the  most  inac- 
cessible parts  of  the  forest  to  escape  tlie  disease, 
and  we  learned  that  they  had  even  cut  down  large 
trees  to  obstruct  the  paths,  lest  our  people  should  too 
easily  follow  them. 

Those  trials  had  scarcely  passed,  when  another  came, 
more  sudden  and  equally  destructive. 

The  cholera  afflicted  the  whole  colony  in  the  early 
part  of  185 7.  hi  Trinity  parish  there  were  772 
cases,  about  a  twelfth  part  of  the  population ;  and  of 
these  224  were  fatal,  the  sufferers  being  chiefly  of  the 
African  and  Hindoo  races. 

From  thence  it  spread  into  the  interior,  and  soon 
attacked  Cabacaburi. 

The  first  case  was  that  of  a  little  Arawak  boy, 
who  was  seized  with  cholera  in  a  canoe  on  the  river, 
and  cast  ashore  by  heathen  Indians.  The  unfor- 
tunate child  lay  unnoticed  till  siuTounded  by  the 
rising  tide.  Some  one  then  saw  him,  and  told  Mrs. 
Landroy,  who  brought  him  ashore  through  the  water, 
and  did  her  best  to  save  him.  But  aid  came  too 
late,  and  he  died  the  same  evening. 

The  next  day  was  Sunday,  and  the  cholera  broke 
out  among  the  congregation.  The  poor  boy  had  been 
carried  by  a  young  Arawak  convert  named  Daniel  to 
his  house  :  and  the  wife  of  Daniel  was  attacked  by 
the  disease,  and  died  in  a  few  hours.  Two  other 
persons  next  died  in  the  same  house.  Then  a  panic 
began,  and  in  alarm  and  terror  the  Indians  fled.  But 
about  five-and-twenty  of  our  best  people  remained, 
having  relatives  sick,  and  feeling  it  their  duty,  con- 

Q 


226  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

traiy  to  the  practice  of  tlieir  heathen  countrymen,  to 
attend  upon  them. 

Wilhelmina,  one  of  the  first  Arawak  women  who 
had  joined  us,  seeing  the  spread  of  the  disease  and 
the  sore  trouble  all  around,  quietly  took  her  paddle 
and  went  to  her  field  a  few  miles  away,  returning 
with  her  small  canoe  laden  with  yams  and  cassava ; 
"  lest,"  as  she  said,  "  want  of  food  should  increase 
the  distress  of  those  who  might  survive."  Her  calm 
and  wise  forethought  seemed  afterwards  to  have  been 
almost  prophetic. 

Daniel  and  some  others  were  attacked  the  same 
evening.  Excessive  fear  now  began  to  prevent  those 
who  were  yet  unstricken  from  nursing  those  who 
were  seized  with  this  (to  them)  unknown  and  fearful 
malady.  Wilhelmina,  ever  foremost  in  good  works, 
tlien  devoted  herself  to  nurse  Daniel.  He  soon 
died,  and  she  herself  was  next  stricken.  Her  family 
wished  to  remove  her  to  her  own  house,  but  she 
forbade  it,  lest  she  should  carry  the  infection  thither. 
Bidding  them  farewell,  she  joined  her  husband  in 
prayer  in  their  native  tongue,  after  which  she  re- 
mained a  few  hours  silent,  and  in  a  state  of  collapse, 
until  her  soul  was  released.  Hers  was  the  tenth 
death.  Seventeen  others  were  lying  around,  ill  with 
the  same  disease.  Two  of  them  soon  after  died,  and 
the  mission  family  was  exhausted  with  incessant 
watching  and  nursing. 

Our  venerable  catechist,  being  ill  of  a  lingering 
disease  of  which  he  afterwards  died,  could  do  but 
little.     While  his  people  were  dying  around  he  was 


EPIDEMIC  DISEASES.  227 

unable  to  aid ;  but  the  female  members  of  liis  family 
were  moving  niglit  and  day  among  the  cottages  to 
answer  the  calls  made  upon  them. 

On  the  Tuesday  Mr.  Landroy  had  sent  me  informa- 
tion of  the  outbreak,  with  a  recjuest  for  a  further 
supply  of  medicines,  which  were  immediately  for- 
warded. After  this  I  received  no  certain  information 
of  their  fate,  but  heard  alarming  rumours,  it  being 
even  reported  that  cdl  were  dead.  Fearing  that  not 
only  the  Indians,  but  also  a  part  of  the  mission 
family  might  have  been  cut  off,  or  deprived  by  the 
disease  of  all  whom  they  might  send  for  assistance, 
I  felt  great  anxiety,  and  resolved,  if  possil)le,  to  visit 
the  spot  with  further  aid  to  ascertain  the  truth. 

A  supply  of  drugs  and  remedies  was  provided,  and 
a  boat  borrowed  :  but  the  great  difficulty  was  to  get 
a  crew,  it  being  considered  a  sort  of  forlorn  hope. 
Mr.  R.  Bunbury,  one  of  our  health  officers,  who  had 
agreed  to  go  with  me,  found  at  last  three  Indians, 
who  had  been  working  on  the  coast ;  but,  being 
alarmed  at  the  deaths  among  the  black  population 
there,  were  willing  to  try  the  interior  for  a  few 
days. 

AYe  arrived  at  the  mission  at  sunset  on  a  beau- 
tiful evening,  and  found  that  the  teacher  and  liis 
family  had  been  spared,  onl}  one  of  them  having 
been  attacked  by  the  cholera.  But  of  the  Indians 
there  were,  indeed,  none  left  strong  enough  to  have 
brought  a  message  to  me.  All  had  been  stricken 
with  the  disease,  and  more  than  one-third  of  the 
number  were  dead. 

Q  2 


228  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

The  survivina'  Arawaks  had  been  removed  from 
the  infected  houses  to  the  Caribi  portion  of  the 
village  (no  Caribs,  fortunately,  having  been  present), 
—  -there  they  recovered,  and  the  plague  was  stayed. 
One  family  alone  was  still  sick,  but  the  others  all 
bore  fearful  traces  of  the  narrowness  of  their  escape. 
Cornelius,  emaciated  and  weak,  was  among  the  sur- 
vivors, but  death  had  visited  his  house  :  and  there 
was  not  an  Indian  present  who  had  not  lost  some 
very  near  and  dear  relative.  One  poor  woman, 
named  Maria,  had  lost  her  husband  just  before,  and 
now  the  cholera  had  swept  away  her  two  children, 
her  mother,  two  sisters,  and  a  nephew.  She  had 
attended  them  all,  and  performed  the  last  offices  for 
all ;  and,  though  she  looked  very  ill,  was  quite 
resigned. 

The  next  day  the  surviving  members  of  the  Church 
were  called  together,  and  the  Holy  Communion  was 
administered  to  them  in  the  thatched  school-house. 
It  was  one  of  the  most  solemn  services  it  has  ever 
been  my  lot  to  perform,  for  we  all  seemed  to  stand 
on  the  brink  of  the  grave.  There  were  ten  Arawaks, 
the  mission  family,  ourselves,  and  two  settlers  who 
had  come  to  me  for  medicines — twenty  in  all. 

Before  leaving  we  paid  a  very  sad  visit  to  ths 
burial-ground.  There,  beneath  the  tall  feather-like 
bamboos,  were  resting  the  mortal  remains  of  most 
of  my  old  friends,  the  first-fruits  to  the  Church  of 
Christ  in  that  quarter.  We  grieved  especially  for 
the  loss  of  Wilhelmina ;  a  woman  who  possessed 
a    most    kind    lieart    and    excellent    disposition,    was 


EPIDEMIC  DISEASES.  229 

deeply  thoiiglitfiil,  and  liad  rendered  serviees  among 
the  women  of  lier  tribe  equal  to  tliose  of  Cornelius 
among  tlie  men.  She  had  formerly  lived  in  my 
family,  and  had  been  of  the  greatest  use  to  my 
wife,  as  well  as  myself,  in  acquiring  their  language ; 
and,  as  an  assistant  in  the  work  of  translation,  I 
ever  found  her  judgment  and  intelligence  much 
superior  to  that  of  any  individual,  male  or  female, 
of  her  race. 

By  this  time  repeated  visitations  had  swept  off 
most  of  our  old  Arawaks,^  and  driven  away  the 
Caribs.  We  could  but  mourn  over  the  dead,  yet 
not  as  those  who  have  no  hope,  for  we  had  seen 
Chiistian  charity,  fortitude,  and  self-devotion,  during 
those  sharp  visitations.  In  the  hope  of  a  meeting 
hereafter,  there  was  much  to  console  and  help  us 
to  say,  "  The  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken 
away ;   blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord." 

^  The  Berbice  river  was  also  visited  by  the  cholera  at  that, 
its  first  appearance  in  Guiana.  The  Arawaks  of  that  river  were 
decimated  by  it. 


CHAPTER  III. 

EEVIVAL    OF   WARAMURI    MISSION. 

The  desolate  Mission — Efforts  for  its  Revival — Arrival  of  Mr. 
Wadie — His  Missionary  Career  and  Services — Severe  Sickness 
— Perilous  and  lonely  Condition — Slow  Recovery  and  Return 
— Relapse — Unwilling  Resignation — Departure — Death. 

While  the  trials  narrated  in  tlie  last  chapter  afEicted 
tlie  mission  on  the  Pomeroon,  an  attempt  was  being 
made  to  revive  the  sister  mission  at  Waramuri  on  the 
Moruca. 

When  the  Bishop,  accompanied  by  Mr.  M'Clintock 
and  myself,  visited  the  abandoned  site  in  1851,  it 
bore  a  most  desolate  appearance.  The  chapel  had 
been  damaged  by  tlie  wind  and  rain,  and  nearly 
devoured  by  wood-ants,  during  the  five  years  which 
had  elapsed  since  Mr.  Nowers's  departure  :  the  bush 
had  grown  up,  and  the  whole  aspect  of  the  settle- 
ment presented  a  grievous  contrast  to  its  former 
pleasant  and  flourishing  condition. 

The  Indian  cottages  had  disappeared,  and  we  saw 
instead  a  number  of  miserable  sheds,  with  flat  roofs 
of  manicole  thatch  ;  each  just  large  enough  to  screen 
two  or  three  hammocks  from  the  weather.  We 
wondered  at  seeing  these  placed  immediately  in  front 


REVIVAL  OF  WAR AMURI  MISSION.  231 

of  tlie  mission  dwelling-liouse ;  but  found  after- 
wards that  Mr.  Currie  (wlio  in  the  interval  ]iad 
been  catechist  there  for  a  short  period)  had  insisted 
on  the  people  placing  their  dwellings  immediately 
under  his  eye.  It  was  a  great  mistake ;  but  the 
good  teacher  had  commanded  a  ship  in  former 
days,  and,  having  probably  a  lingering  attachment 
to  naval  habits  and  discipline,  desired,  from  the 
gallery  of  his  house,  as  from  a  quarter-deck,  to  see 
all  that  was  going  on  among  the  people  under  his 
charge.  But,  though  this  was  intended  for  their  moral 
benefit,  the  Indians  were  by  no  means  grateful  for 
such  close  super\asion,  and  would  only  put  up  the 
temporary  sheds  we  saw,  waiting  for  a  superintending 
clergyman  to  visit  the  mission  and  relax  the  rule. 

Mr,  Currie  had  been  compelled  to  resign  his  post 
through  severe  illness,  and  at  the  time  of  our  visit  the 
place  was  entirely  deserted.  It  had  a  bad  name  for 
sickness ;  and  there  seemed  little  prospect  of  obtaining 
another  teacher. 

Hoping  for  better  times,  although  it  was  impossible 
to  save  the  chapel,  I  was  desirous  of  still  keeping 
up  the  dwelling-house  ;  and  as  a  family  from  George- 
town asked  permission  to  occupy  it  for  a  season,  for 
the  purpose  of  procuring  and  stuffing  specimens  of 
the  beautiful  biixls  in  the  neighbourhood,  I  gladly 
consented,  on  condition  of  their  keeping  the  thatch 
in  repam 

The  cause  of  the  incessant  fevers  and  mortality 
which  had  driven  away  the  missionaries  was,  unques- 
tionably, the    large  swamp  in   front.     I   read   about 


232  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

this  period  a  medical  report,  in  which  it  was  stated 
that  a  belt  of  bush  between  a  swamp  and  human 
dwellings  in  the  troj^ics  acts  in  a  great  degree  as  a 
barrier  to  the  passage  of  the  malaria.  Our  mis- 
sionaries had  kept  the  slope  of  the  hill  perfectly  free 
from  bush,  thinking  it  best  for  health  as  well  as  for 
neatness ;  but  it  was  now  grown  up  again,  and  I 
requested  that  it  might  be  allowed  to  remain.  The 
result  seems  to  jDrove  the  correctness  of  the  above 
theory,  for  the  mission  has  since  been  as  free  from 
fever  as  any  other  settlement  I  know  of  in  the 
interior;  and  I  would  strongly  recommend  the  trial 
of  so  simple  a  plan  at  any  station  where  that  disease 
prevails. 

Three  more  years  rolled  away — the  bird-stuffers 
were  gone,  and  the  mission  still  remained  without 
a  teacher. 

The  Post-holder  more  than  once  urged  the  neces- 
sity of  re-establishing  it,  even  for  the  temporal  benefit 
of  the  Indians  around,  among  whom,  especially  the 
Waraus,  murder  and  violence  were  frec[uent.  In  one 
of  his  official  reports,  dated  Dec.  3d,  1853,  after 
stating  the  circumstances  of  the  murder  of  a  poor 
woman  in  the  Upper  Moruca,  and  his  arrest  of  five 
Waraus  who  had  committed  the  deed  with  extreme 
cruelty,  he  went  on  to  say,  "  I  nmst  respectfully 
suggest  the  re-establishment  of  Waramuri  Mission ; 
and  if  a  fit  and  proper  person  be  appointed  to  it, 
and  he  become  acquainted  with  the  Indiaus  entrusted 
to  his  care,  murders  and  every  other  description  of 
crime  will  vanish  from  amongst  them. 


REVIVAL  OF  WARAMURI  MISSION.  2X^ 

"  The  Arawak  Indiaus,  who  attend  the  mission  in 
the  Pomeroon,  afford  the  strongest  example  of  the 
correctness  of  the  opinion  just  offered ; — for  example, 
when  I  first  arrived  in  this  district,  many  years 
before  any  missionary  was  appointed  to  it,  a  more 
disorderly  people  than  the  present  Arawaks  could 
not  be  found  in  any  part  of  the  province  ;  murders 
and  violent  cases  of  assaults  were  of  frequent  occur- 
rence. But  now  the  case  is  reversed  :  no  outrages  of 
any  description  ever  happen,  they  regidarly  attend 
Divine  service,  their  children  are  being  educated, 
they  themselves  dress  neatly,  are  lawfully  married, 
and,  as  a  body,  there  are  no  people,  in  point  of 
general  good  conduct,  to  surpass  them.  This  change, 
which  has  caused  peace  and  contentment  to  prevail, 
has  been  brought  about  solely  through  missionary 
labonr ;  and  why  not,  may  I  inquire,  extend  similar 
benefits  to  the  more  Ijenio^hted  children  of  the 
woods  V'^ 

This  recommendation  gave  powerful  aid  to  our 
efforts,  and  the  Bishop  was  soon  after  enabled  to 
inform    me    that    he    had    eno-ao-ed    the    services   of 

o   o 

Mr.  J.  "W.  Wadie,  who  came  out  as  a  missionary  of 
the  Society  for  the  Propagation  of  the  Gospel,  in 
April   1854,  to  take  charge  of  the  vacant  mission. 

On  my  return  from  a  visit  to  the  rivers,  I  found 
Mr.  Wadie  at  my  house — a  man  of  middle  age,  and 

^  It  "will  be  observed  that  the  above  (though  true  to  the  present 
day)  was  written  by  j\[r.  jM'Clintock  before  the  period  of  the 
epidemics,  when  our  first  and  best  converts  among  the  Arawaks 
were  nearly  all  living,  and  the  work  among  them  was  in  its  highest 
prosperity. 


234  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

very  prepossessing  appearance ;  of  sanguine  tempera- 
ment, and  full  of  zeal  for  tlie  good  cause  in  which 
lie  had  embarked.  Having  been  instructed  by  Mr. 
Nowers  before  he  left  England,  he  had  provided  all 
things  necessary  for  the  life  he  was  to  lead — had  a 
good  supply  of  medicines,  carpenter's  tools,  gun,  &c., 
and  could  use  them  all.  Thus  equipped,  after  a 
sojourn  of  a  few  days,  he  bade  us  farewell,  and 
departed  in  good  spirits  for  his  solitary  post. 

On  his  way  he  stopped  at  the  Pomeroon  mission, 
as  I  had  advised,  and  left  balf  his  goods :  the  boat 
not  being  large  enough  to  carry  all  in  safety  over 
the  sea  between  the  mouths  of  the  two  rivers.  On 
arriving  at  Waramuri,  two  days  after,  he  imme- 
diately sent  back  the  boat,  with  all  her  crew,  for 
the  rest.  He  then  remained  at  the  deserted  mission, 
with  a  large  swamp  in  front  and  the  impervious 
forest  behind,  in  solitude  as  complete  (for  the  time) 
as  that  of  Selkirk,  or  the  fabled  Crusoe,  on  his 
desert  island. 

He  found  the  mission-cottage  much  decayed,  and 
full  of  vermin  and  noxious  reptiles,  which  harboured 
in  the  thatch.  There  was  also  a  large  hole  in  one 
of  the  sides.  This  he  barricaded  for  the  present 
with  his  packages,  to  keep  out  wild  animals,  tied 
up  his  hammock  for  the  night,  and,  with  his  loaded 
gun  ready  at  his  side  to  greet  any  intruder,  proceeded 
to  make  himself  as  comfortable  as  circumstances  would 
permit. 

On  looking  over  his  goods  he  was  rather  astonished 
and  dismayed   to  find   that  he  had  left  all  his  j^ro- 


REVIVAL  OF  WARAMURI  MISSION.  235 

visions  beliind,  except  a  large  supply  of  tea  and  a 
few  biscuits.  However,  tlicre  was  now  no  help  for 
the  oversio-ht  until  the  return  of  the  boat.     He  had 

O 

no  means  of  quitting  the  spot,  and  was  compelled  to 
subsist  on  that  slender  diet  for  five  or  six  days, 
during  which  time  he  remained  quite  alone,  as  the 
Indians  had  not  heard  of  his  arrival. 

At  last  a  party  of  AVaraus  found  him  out.  They 
came  and  took  up  their  quarters  under  the  sheds  I 
have  mentioned,  immediately  in  front  of  the  house, 
and  in  full  yiew. 

He  had,  as  yet,  seen  only  the  Christianized  and 
comparatively  civilized  Indians  at  the  other  mission, 
and  was  not  at  all  prepared  for  the  misery  and 
filth  of  these.  Of  all  the  Indians  near  the  coast 
the  Waraus  are  least  attentive  to  personal  cleanliness ; 
and  those  Waraus  wTxe  amongst  the  most  unsavoury 
of  their  race. 

The  wretched  appearance  of  both  sexes  ; — the  squalor 
of  the  younger  women  and  the  haggard  and  weird 
appearance  of  the  old ; — their  almost  entire  want  of 
clothing  ;  and  the  filthy  habits  which  he  witnessed, — 
filled  the  new  comer  ^^ith  profound  disgust.  He 
forthwith  resolved  to  admit  no  Indian  as  an  iirmate 
of  his  house,  but  to  cook  and  do  everything  for  him- 
self; a  resolution  to  which  for  years  he  stedfastly 
adhered. 

Those  miserable  Waraus  being,  as  usual,  half- 
starved,  had  come  to  beg ;  and,  as  Mr.  Wadie  was 
one  of  the  most  generous  of  men,  his  i)rovisions, 
when  they  did  arrive,  underwent  such  a  rapid  con- 


236  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

sumption  tliat  lie  found  he  should  soon  he  in  want 
himself. 

This  was  an  unfortunate  beginning.  His  liberality 
being  thus  made  known,  every  idle,  skulking  Indian 
in  the  district  came  to  prey  upon  him  ;  and  by  such, 
almost  exclusively,  on  my  first  visit,  I  found  him 
surrounded.  But  the  better  and  more  honourable  sort, 
perceiving  that  the  new  missionary  kept  his  apart- 
ments closed,  and  would  admit  no  Indian  as  a  member 
of  his  household,  felt  deep  resentment,  and  held  them- 
selves aloof,  as  from  a  man  who  disliked  and  despised 
their  race. 

The  houses  of  the  Indians  being  oj)en  to  all  who 
come  peaceably,  they  expect  the  same  from  all 
who  profess  friendship  towards  them  ;  and  the  system 
of  exclusion  which  Mr.  Wadie  thought  himself  com- 
pelled to  adopt  retarded  his  usefulness  for  a  long 
time. 

The  mission-house,  having  no  keeper,  was  entered 
and  robbed  while  Mr.  Wadie  was  gone  to  George- 
town to  be  ordained  Deacon ;  and  the  thieves,  on 
his  return,  cleverly  arranged  matters  so  as  to  turn 
his  suspicions  on  the  Indians.  He  forthwith  had  his 
house  surrounded  by  a  palisade  of  strong  posts  and 
wattles,  more  than  fifteen  feet  in  height,  as  an  addi- 
tional protection.  The  erection  of  this  outwork  gave 
increased  offence. 

Notwithstanding  those  serious  di'awbacks,  he  la- 
boured very  hard  for  the  benefit  of  those  around  him. 
Morning  and  evening  all  were  summoned  to  Divine 
worship  ;  he  was  most  diligent  and  successful  in  school 


EEVIVAL  OF  WARAMURI  MISSION.  237 

duties,  and,  being  a  man  of  pure  Christian  life  and 
morals,  his  example  began  to  take  effect. 

In  1855,  the  Bishop  visited  the  mission.  He  saw 
and  appreciated  the  zealous  labours,  and  the  good 
that  was  being  done ;  and  his  mild  and  fatherly 
counsel  was  of  great  service  in  pointing  out  the 
impediments  to  further  usefulness.  Among  other 
things,  he  recommended  the  immediate  cutting  down 
of  the  high  fence,  telling  J\Ir.  Wadie  that,  "notwith- 
standing its  height,  it  coukl  keep  out  no  Indian  who 
wished  to  enter." 

Tliese  words  were  scarcely  spoken  when,  from  the 
window  of  the  mission-house,  we  saw  an  amusing 
proof  of  their  correctness. 

A  wild  young  Carib,  who  was  anxious  to  have  a 
better  ^dew  of  the  congregation  then  assembling  for 
Divine  service,  ran  up  the  fence  like  a  monkey,  and 
perched  himself  on  the  top  of  one  of  the  corner  posts. 
There,  squatting  on  his  heels,  and  with  his  copper- 
tinted  back  shining  in  the  sun,  from  that  small 
perch  he  gravely  surveyed  the  other  Indians  who, 
in  every  variety  of  dress  and  undress,  were  passing 
beneath  him  towards  the  place  of  worship. 

We  were  amused,  both  at  his  grotesque  appear- 
ance and  at  the  unintentional  proof  he  had  given  of 
the  truth  of  the  remark  just  made.  As  a  matter  of 
course,  the  fence  was  soon  after  reduced  to  a  less 
obnoxious  height. 

The  next  day  we  went  on  a  missionary  expedi- 
tion to  the  Indians  who  live  beyond  the  liead  waters 
of  j\Ioruca. 


238  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

There  is  in  tlicat  part  (as  I  have  already  said)  an 
immense  savannah,  deeply  covered  with  water  in  the 
wet  season,  but  an  impassable  bog  in  the  dry.  It 
drains  in  two  directions  :  towards  the  Moruca  on  the 
one  hand,  and  on  the  other  towards  the  large  river 
Waini  (or  Guainia,  as  the  Spaniards  wrote  it),  from 
which  the  comitry  derives  its  name.  In  the  wet 
season,  l)y  a  network  of  streams,  there  is  inland 
navigation  from  the  mouth  of  the  Moruca  to  that 
of  the  Orinoco ;  and  at  one  time  there  was  consider- 
able traffic  by  Venezuelan  boats  that  way. 

AVe  found  the  savannah  so  shallow,  that  after 
passing  through  some  of  the  tributaries  of  the  Waini, 
and  spending  a  night  among  the  Indians  on  the  banks 
of  the  Asagata,  we  judged  it  best  to  return,  as  the 
August  heat  had  set  in.  And  it  was  well  we  did  so, 
for  we  had  much  labour  in  forcing  our  return  passage 
through  the  rapidly  drying  swamp. 

Eeturning  to  the  mission,  we  commenced  the  build- 
ing of  another  chapel-school  in  the  room  of  the  one 
destroyed.  It  was  to  be  a  very  humble  structure, 
merely  an  open  logic  ;  the  eastern  end  being  enclosed, 
and  having  a  raised  floor  for  the  performance  of 
Divine  worship.  We  had  no  funds,  and  could  do  no 
better  in  the  then  precarious  circumstances  of  that 
poor  mission. 

Before  the  Bishop  departed,  an  Acawoio  Indian, 
known  by  the  name  of  Hughes,  came  with  the  skin  of 
a  very  large  specimen  of  the  black  jaguar,  an  animal 
rarely  seen  even  by  the  Indians  themselves.  It  is 
said  by  Humboldt  to  l)e  "  the  largest  and  most  blood- 


REVIVAL  OF  WAEAMUBI  MISSION.  239 

thirsty  variety  ;"  and  is  more  feared  than  any  other, 
as  its  dark  colour  renders  it  almost  invisible  when 
prowling  or  crouching  in  the  deep  shades  of  the  forest. 
In  the  present  instance  the  animal  was  detected  by 
the  Indian's  dog,  and  shot  dead  by  an  arrow,  which 
entered  the  thorax,  and  came  out  behind  one  of  the 
fore-legs.  The  Bishop  purchased  the  skin,  and  also 
wished  to  buy  the  formidable  spear-headed  arrow  by 
which  the  beast  had  been  slain.  But  the  Indian 
declined  to  part  with  it ;  not  (as  we  at  first  thought) 
from  a  sentimental  attachment  to  the  weapon  which 
had  done  such  good  service,  but  because  he  would 
not  go  unarmed.  When  we  had  procured  a  similar 
arrow  from  a  AYarau  who  was  present,  he  readily 
exchanoed. 

This  visit  had  done  much  to  strengthen  the 
hands  of  Mr.  Wadie,  who  evidently  felt,  with  us, 
that  it  had  been  a  time  of  profitable  and  pleasant 
communion.  On  our  departure  he  went  with  us  a 
little  way  down  the  river,  and  was  as  much  affected 
as  we  were  ourselves  when  he  bade  farev/ell,  and 
with  tears  in  his  eyes  stepped  from  our  boat  into  the 
small  canoe  that  was  to  convey  him  back  to  his 
hermit-like  life  at  the  mission. 

Before  many  months  had  passed  he  experienced  a 
terrible  proof  that  it  is  not  good  for  man  to  live 
alone.  He  had  fitted  up  his  cottage  with  great 
ingenuity,  having  made  shelves,  cupboards,  window- 
blinds,    screens,  &c.,   and  painted    and  papered^  the 

^  The  engravings  of  the  Illustrated  London  Xeivs  and  other 
papers  have  been  much  used  for  that  purpose  in  the  cottages  of  the 


240  THE  INDIAN  TRIE  EH  OF  GUIANA. 

interior,  until  it  had  a  neat  and  even  elegant  appear- 
ance ;  but  he  had  little  comfort  in  it,  for,  except  at 
my  visits,  he  had  no  society  whatever.  We  could  not 
persuade  him  to  admit  a  domestic,  his  lil^erality 
indeed  being  such  that  he  could  hardly  afford  to  keep 
one.  His  food  (prepared,  not  too  skilfully,  l^y  him- 
self) consisted  too  much  of  salt  provisions,  with  hard 
biscuits  instead  of  bread.  This  diet,  combined  with 
incessant  work  in  teaching,  and  the  debilitating 
climate,  brought  on  indigestion  in  its  most  aggravated 
form.  He  became  too  weak  to  perform  any  duty,  or 
even  to  go  out :  and  the  Indians,  who  were  not 
admitted  to  his  house,  and  knew  not  the  cause  of 
his  seclusion,  gradually  withdrew  from  the  place, 
takinof  with  them  their  children. 

In  this  sad  plight  he  would  certainly  have  died 
without  one  friendly  hand  to  close  his  eyes  ;  and  was 
indeed  stretched  on  his  bed  awaiting  death,  when  a 
kind  Providence  sent  unexpected  relief. 

A  Christian  Arawak  from  the  Pomeroon  Mission, 
who  was  voyaging  alone  in  his  little  canoe,  found 
himself  at  nightfall  near  Waramuri.  He  thought 
that  he  would  land,  pay  his  respects  to  the  mis- 
sionary, and  perhaps  stay  there  that  night.  To  his 
astonishment  he  found  the  place  deserted  ;  there  were 
neither  the  usual  fires  nor  the  people.  He  then  went 
up  to  the  mission-house,  and  heard  low  groans  from 
within.     Having  forced  his  way  in  through  a  window, 

Creole  peasantry  and  settlers,  and  may  be  even  seen  on  tlie  tliatclied 
partitions  of  the  Indian  dwellings  near  tlio  coast.  They  aid  our 
cilorts  in  enlarging  the  circle  of  their  ideas,  and  I  consider  tlieir 
0 licet  as  most  civilizing  and  ])oneiici;d. 


REVIVAL  OF  WARAMURI  MISSION.  241 

lie  found  Mr.  Wadie  as  above  described,  who  thank- 
fully, Avith  feeble  voice,  accepted  his  offered  services. 
Being  told  by  him  that  he  would  probably  find  some 
Indians  at  a  neighbouring  settlement,  he  took  a  light, 
and,  following  the  path  indicated,  went  through  the 
bush  to  seek  them.  He  found  two  men,  who,  on 
hearing  his  tale,  immediately  took  down  their  ham- 
mocks, caught  up  their  paddles,  and  hastened  with 
him  to  remove  their  sick  teacher. 

The  mission  had  a  boat  with  a  good  tent,  in  which 
the  three  men  placed  him ;  but  it  was  too  large  and 
heavy  for  such  a  slender  crew ;  and  the  passage  over 
the  sea  against  wind  and  tide  was  very  painful  and 
tedious  to  the  poor  sufierer.  At  length  he  reached 
Pomeroon,  and  was  most  kindly  received,  first  by 
some  hospitable  ladies  on  a  small  plantain  estate 
called  Phoenix  Park,  in  the  lower  district ;  and  the 
next  night  at  the  Pomeroon  Mission.  On  the  fourth 
day  he  reached  my  residence,  and  we  were  astonished 
and  alarmed  at  his  emaciated  and  ghastly  appearance- 
Medical  aid  was  soon  obtained,  but  an  attempt  to 
administer  medicine  gave  his  ulcerated  stomach  such 
agony  that  the  doctor  desisted,  telling  us  that,  if 
his  life  were  saved,  it  could  be,  humanly  speaking, 
by  nursing  only.  He  had  taken  nothing  but  milk, 
which  was  fortunately  obtainable  at  each  station, 
since  he  left  Waramuri,  and  could  bear  no  other 
sustenance. 

For  many  days  he  lay  between  life  and  death  : 
but  at  length,  by  God's  blessing,  we  saw  symptoms 
of   returning    strength.       In  a    few    weeks    he    was 

R 


242  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

able  to  bear  a  voyage  to  Georgetown ;  and  under 
the  kind  care  and  hospitality  of  the  Archdeacon  and 
his  brother,  Mr.  J.  Jones,  of  Plantation  Houston,  he 
then  recovered,  rapidly. 

By  the  end  of  the  year  he  was  again  ready  for 
duty ;  and,  though  other  work  was  offered,  he  would 
not  resign  his  Indian  mission,  but  returned  to  it 
with  unabated  zeal. 

The  Archdeacon  and  myself  visited  him  in  the 
following  April,  and  were  pleased  to  see  that  he  had 
greatly  relaxed  his  habit  of  seclusion  ;  and  that  an 
excellent  feeling  was  existing  between  him  and  the 
Indians,  who  now  understood  him,  appreciated  his 
devotion,  and  applied  to  him  for  aid  in  every  emer- 
gency. A  corpse  had  that  evening  been  brought 
for  burial  (which  cannot  in  the  tropics  be  delayed), 
and  he  was  making  a  coffin  for  it  of  some  boards 
intended  for  the  chapel  floor.  It  was  late ;  and 
though  the  Archdeacon  lent  a  hand  at  the  coffin,  and 
in  preparing  the  grave,  the  interment  did  not  take 
place  till  towards  midnight. 

The  mission-school  was  flourishing,  and  at  that 
period  numbered  more  than  one  hundred  Indian 
children.  How  Mr.  Wadie  delighted  in  this  part  of 
his  work,  may  be  seen  from  his  own  words  in  one 
of  his  last  reports  to  the  society  which  had  sent 
him  out : — 

"  I  shall  never  forget  the  gladsome  manner  in  which 
the  children  rallied  around  me  on  my  return  to  the 
mission,  after  my  late  long  and  almost  fatal  illness. 
Few  can  mistake  the  simple  honest-heartedness  of  a 


REVIVAL  OF  WARAMURI  MISSION.  243 

child,  especially  the  children  I  have  to  deal  with  ; 
one  look  told  me  more  than  words  could  do,  and 
their  ready  compliance  to  do  all  I  may  ask  them  is 
another  proof  of  their  sincerity  and  attachment.  The 
children  who  attend  the  school  come  from  various 
districts  of  the  mission,  although  they  may  be  said 
to  reside  at  Waraniuri,  as  they  only  go  to  their  re- 
spective places  for  a  supply  of  food,  or  for  a  few 
days  occasionally.  I  am  glad  to  inform  you  also 
that  there  is  a  feeling  of  pride  exhibiting  itself 
among  the  adults  of  this  mission,  as  to  the  proj)er 
and  decent  appearance  of  their  children,  both  at 
the  day  and  Sunday  schools.  Many  children  are 
kept  away  at  this  time,  on  account  of  their  parents 
not  being  able  to  clothe  them  like  the  others. 
This  I  have  endeavoured  to  remedy,  as  far  as  I  can 
afford  it,  by  quarterly  giving  to  a  few  of  them 
clothing ;  but  cannot  do  so  as  effectually  as  I  could 
wish  from  want  of  means,  as  I  supply  out  of  my 
salary  all  that  is  necessary  for  the  working  of  the 
schools.  I  do  here  everything  for  myself,  so  that 
I  may  devote  a  portion  of  my  stipend  every  quarter 
to  the  benefit  of  the  mission,  either  by  clothing 
children,  finding  books,  or  as  the  case  may  be.  And 
this  I  firmly  believe,  that  every  missionary  ivho  has 
truly  his  work  at  heart,  will  in  every  possible  ivay 
deny  himself  to  advance  the  interest  of  Christ's 
kingdom  among  the  2'>eop)le  ivhere  he  is  ^9?acecZ." 

In  the  same  report  he  mentions  the  better  ob- 
servance of  the  Lord's  day.  "  Very  few  of  the  Indians 
now  devote  the  time  between  school  and  the  service 

R  2 


244  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

of  the  Churcli  as  heretofore  to  making  '  quakes ' 
(baskets)  for  holding  fish,  or  sails  for  their  corials,  or 
in  preparing  ita-palm  leaves  for  making  hammocks." 

After  describing  his  method  of  combining  the 
Arawak  and  Caribi  translations  I  had  given  him 
with  the  ordinary  instruction  to  those  tribes  in 
English  in  his  Sunday-school,  he  states  his  intention 
of  "  making  an  attempt  to  supply  the  same  to  the 
Warau  in  his  own  tongue."  This  was  greatly  needed 
in  that  district,  which  is  chiefly  inhabited  by  Waraus, 
but  ere  he  felt  himself  qualified  by  study  to  com- 
mence the  task  his  strength  had  given  way. 

In  September  1857,  the  Bishoji  found  a  congrega- 
tion of  271  Indians,  while  133  children  were  present 
in  the  school. 

But  the  missionary's  health  had  again  broken  down, 
his  head  being  at  times  seriously  afi'ected  by  his 
returning  malady,  and  he  was  reluctantly  compelled 
to  resign  his  post.  His  labours,  always  energetic,  had 
during  the  last  year  been  even  more  abundant ;  they 
had  been  also  more  wisely  directed  and  effectual, 
and  the  Indians  of  all  the  tribes  regretted  his  de- 
parture, as  they  had  that  of  Mr.  Nowers  eleven 
years  before. 

After  a  short  period  of  duty  with  me  in  Trinity 
parish,  and  afterwards  in  St.  Paul's,  Demerara,  Mr. 
Wadie  died  in  Georgetown,  at  the  house  of  his  good 
friend,  Archdeacon  Jones. 

At  the  Pomeroon  Mission,  our  venerable  catechist, 
Mr.  Landroy,  after  more  than  a  year  and  a  half  of 
lingering    decay,    died    soon    after.     Thus    within   a 


REVIVAL  OF  WABAMVRI  MISSION.  245 

short  period  I  liad  to  mourn  the  loss  of  both  my 
fellow-Labourers  in  the  Indian  field. 

Both  missions  were  again  vacant.  The  elder  station, 
my  own  old  post,  after  a  period  of  comparative  pro- 
sperity, had  been  nearly  crushed  by  three  years  of 
various  kinds  of  sickness,  as  related  in  the  last 
chapter.  The  other,  which  had  previously  suffered 
such  great  depression,  and  been  abandoned  six  years 
out  of  nine,  had,  as  we  have  just  seen,  suddenly 
revived,  and  begun  to  flourish  greatly,  when  it  was 
deprived  of  its  missionary,  just  as  the  seed  which 
had  been  sown  by  his  predecessors  and  himself 
seemed  ripening  to  the  harvest. 

The  Church,  looking  on  this  part  of  her  work,  could 
but  see  that  these  things  were,  in  appearance,  against 
her.  Still  she  had  met  with  many  encouragements, 
as  well  as  great  difficulties.  And  as  high  above  the 
consideration  of  either  rose  the  Master's  great  com- 
mand, "  Teach  all  nations,"  our  duty  was,  through 
good  and  evil,  still  to  persevere. 

"  Faint,  yet  pursuing." 


CHAPTER  IV. 


PEOGRESS. 


Indians  take  down  and  remove  their  Chapel  in  one  Day — Pro- 
gress— Superstitions  of  the  Waraus,  and  Impostures  practised 
on  them— Their  Habits,  &c. 

After  the  various  trials  and  losses  related  in  the  last 
two  chapters,  the  Indian  tribes  in  our  vicinity  enjoyed 
a  period  of  comparative  tranquillity.  Children  grew 
up,  and  new  faces  began  to  fill  the  gaps  which  death 
had  made. 

The  handsome  little  chapel  at  the  junction  of  the 
Arapaiaco  with  the  Pomeroon  had  not  been  built 
twenty  years ;  yet  it  had  become  so  decayed  and 
eaten  by  wood-ants  as  to  compel  the  erection  of  a 
new  one.  We  decided  to  quit  that  spot,  which, 
though  rendered  picturesque  by  the  meeting  of  the 
waters,  was  only  accessible  from  the  river,  and  to 
build  a  new  chapel  on  Cabacaburi  hill. 

The  Indians,  at  my  request,  readily  cut  and  squared 
the  timbers  for  the  frame  ;  the  work  being  divided 
among  the  respective  tribes,  so  that  each  might  con- 
tribute its  allotted  portion.  But  to  provide  boards, 
&c.,  was  beyond  their  power  ;  and,  as  it  was  desirable 


FEOGBESS.  247 

to  make  use  of  the  sound  portions  of  the  old  build- 
ing as  far  as  we  could,  I  begged  them  to  assist  in 
taking  it  down,  and  bringing  the  materials  to  the  site 
proposed  for  the  new  one.  To  this  they  readily  con- 
sented. Accordingly,  the  next  morning  they  turned 
out  with  their  axes,  and  went  to  the  chapel  in  a 
flotilla  of  canoes  of  all  sizes,  headed  by  Cornelius, 
who,  though  now  grown  old,  had  lost  none  of  his 
energy  and  zeal.  Pemberton,  a  man  of  colour,  who 
acted  as  lay-reader,  and  was  an  experienced  carpenter, 
directed  and  led  their  labour  in  taking  the  building 
to  pieces.  These  they  brought  to  the  hill  in  their 
little  craft, — benches,  shingles,  boards,  uprights,  and 
other  timbers  ;  the  women  and  children,  with  many 
a  merry  laugh,  receiving  the  loads  at  the  water-side, 
and  dragging  them  up  the  hill.  As  the  day  wore  on 
their  interest  in  the  work  increased  :  some  put  up 
handkerchiefs  of  various  colours,  which  served  as 
flags,  and  drew  attention  to  their  little  canoes  reeling 
under  preposterously  unwieldy  loads,  as  they  came 
again  and  again  with  fresh  supplies.  Thus  the  whole 
buiding  (except  one  load,  which  remained  till  the  next 
day,  and  some  rotten  timbers)  was  removed  to  the 
mission  hill,  a  distance  of  one  mile,  before  sunset, 
by  the  united  labour  of  the  Indian  tribes,  who  on 
that  20th  of  April,  1858,  certainly  seemed  moved  by 
God  to  do  all  in  their  power  for  the  erection  of  a 
building  for  the  glory  of  His  Name. 

When  I  returned  to  the  spot  the  next  week  (after 
visiting  the  other  stations)  I  found  that  Pemberton 
had   erected   the    frame  of  the   chancel   of  the  new 


248  THE  INDIAN  TBIBES  OF  GUIANA.' 

building ;  and  that  the  Indians,  to  enable  me  to 
perform  the  service  of  that  one  day,  had  covered  it 
in  with  a  thatch  of  the  leaves  of  the  trooly-palm. 
While  thanking  them,  I  told  them  that  "the  state 
of  our  funds  caused  me  to  despair  of  getting  a  roof 
of  better  materials."  They  all  seemed  disappointed 
at  this  announcement,  though  they  acquiesced  in  the 
silent  manner  of  Indians,  as  to  a  thing  for  which 
there  was  no  help. 

But  Cornelius,  who  had  set  his  heart  on  having 
a  thoroughly  good  and  suitable  house  for  the  worship 
of  God,  assembled  the  leading  men  that  evening ; 
and,  unknown  to  me,  held  a  consultation  with  them 
in  the  partly-built  place  of  worship  by  moonlight. 
The  result  of  this  was  a  deputation  to  express  to  me 
their  regret  "  that  the  roof  of  God's  house  was  to 
be  of  thatch — no  better  than  their  own  ! "  They 
offered  to  tri/  to  make  shingles  instead,  if  I  could 
find  money  to  pay  for  putting  them  on. 

The  Lieutenant-Governor  of  the  colony,  Mr.  W. 
Walker,  soon  after  hearing  of  this  circumstance, 
kindly  gave  the  amount  required.  Meanwhile  the 
Indians  cut  down  the  wallaba-trees,  and  split  them 
into  shingles  ;  though  they  had  not  before  attempted 
that  kind  of  work,  and  had  to  use  their  cutlasses 
for  the  want  of  more  suitable  tools. 

Soon  after  this  the  lay-reader  died.  His  place  was 
supplied  by  an  Englishman,  named  Thomas  Minns. 
He  was  then  about  seventy  years  of  age,  and  had 
been  a  sailor  in  early  life  under  Admirals  CoUingwood 
and  Duckworth.     He  had  been  with  the  latter  in  the 


PROGRESS.  249 

action  of  tlic  Dardanelles;  and  was  the  last  man 
saved  from  the  Ajax,  burnt  February  14th,  1807. 
He  told  me  that  he  was  then  in  a  most  perilous 
position,  hanging  by  the  jib-boom  of  the  blazing 
vessel,  while  a  poor  woman  below  was  clinging  to  the 
martingale.  The  latter  being  observed  from  one  of  the 
boats  of  the  fleet,  which  had  all  withdra^vn  to  await 
the  explosion  of  the  magazine,  the  brave  tars,  with 
shouts  of  "  Save  the  woman ! "  pulled  again  under  the 
bows  to  take  her  in,  and  afforded  him  the  opportunity 
of  dropping  in  also.  He  had  since  then  visited  many 
climes,  and  experienced  many  vicissitudes  by  sea  and 
land ;  and  now  desired  to  end  his  pilgrimage  in  the 
service  of  religion  among  the  Indians.  He  had 
become  very  deaf,  but  his  voice  was  strong  and  clear, 
and,  until  his  death  at  the  age  of  seventy-seven,  he 
read  the  Holy  Scriptures  and  the  daily  prayers  in 
a  manner  that  for  reverence  and  distinctness  left 
nothing  to  be  desired. 

Meanwhile  Mr.  D.  Campbell  had  offered  his  services 
as  teacher  among  the  Waraus  and  other  tribes  at  Wara- 
muri,  and  we  now,  after  our  various  calamities  and 
losses  by  disease  and  death  in  that  quarter,  began  to 
reap  some  fruit  from  the  seed  sown  fourteen  years 
before.  Many  were  baptized,  and  a  little  band  of 
communicants  was  formed  there. 

But  from  that  time  also  the  Indian  sorcerers,  who 
are  so  powerful  among  the  Waraus,  used  every  artifice 
to  excite  superstitious  terror,  and  keep  their  tribe 
from  joining  us,  and  in  this  they  were  but  too 
successful. 


250  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

Some  of  their  artifices  were  of  the  most  absurd 
character  ;  so  ridiculous  indeed  that  we  could  but 
wonder  at  the  impudence  which  invented,  and  the 
credulity  which  believed  in  them.  An  instance 
occurred  in  March,  1863,  just  after  the  Bishop  had 
visited  the  mission  and  met  many  Waraus  there.  To 
counteract  the  efi'ects  of  his  visit  the  following  plan 
was  adopted : — 

A  Warau  woman  of  singularly  weird  appearance 
was  employed  to  spread  a  report  that  she  had  seen, 
near  a  place  called  Kamwatta  (or  "the  bamboo")  the 
figure  of  a  white  man  on  horseback,  riding  through 
the  air,  who  promised  to  give  money  and  other 
valuable  presents  to  her,  and  to  all  of  her  tribe 
who  would  assemble  at  that  spot  and  dance  from 
early  morning  till  early  afternoon.  But,  as  Chris- 
tianity would  be  an  efi'ectual  barrier  to  the  reception 
of  that  supernatural  benefit,  all  baptized  persons  were 
warned  not  to  attend.  This,  while  it  marked  the 
animus  of  the  impostors  in  disparaging  the  Chris- 
tians, would  also  tend  to  save  the  credit  of  their 
prophetess,  as  none  of  her  dupes  could  positively  say 
that  one  of  the  forbidden  might  not  be  lurking  near, 
and  so  preventing  the  expected  benefit. 

The  result  of  this  ridiculous  story  was  a  gathering 
in  great  force  of  the  heathen  Waraus,  who  made 
and  drank  paiwari  ;  and  daily,  during  the  pre- 
scribed hours,  obeyed  the  mandate  they  had  received. 
Warau  dancing  is  in  general  more  grotesque  than 
elegant ;  as  it  chiefly  consists  in  staggering  backwards 
and     forwards    with     the    l)ody    slightly    bent,    and 


PROGBESS.  251 

stamping  violently  on  the  ground  :  but  it  was  kept 
up  on  this  occasion  with  a  vigour  and  perseverance 
that  might  have  atoned  for  its  want  of  grace,  and 
fairly  earned  the  expected  reward. 

But,  dance  as  lustily  as  they  would,  the  aerial 
horseman  remained  invisible,  and  made  no  sign. 
"  There  w^as  neither  voice,  nor  any  to  answer,  nor 
any  that  regarded."  They  reaped  no  pecuniary  emolu- 
ment, but  had  only  their  dances  for  their  pains.  At 
length  they  dispersed  to  their  homes,  there  to  rest 
their  wearied  limbs,  get  over  their  disappointment 
and  the  effects  of  the  paiwari ;  and, — after  a  while, 
— lend  a  willing  ear  to  the  next  delusion  of  their 
sorcerers. 

Mr.  Campbell,  taking  with  him  Hubbard,  the 
Christian  chief  of  the  Moruca  Arawaks,  went  to 
Kamwatta  while  this  imposture  was  going  on,  hoping 
to  reason  with  and  convince  them  of  their  folly : — a 
hazardous  attempt  in  their  then  excited  state.  He 
met  seven  men  fishing  in  the  stream,  and  found  six 
women  in  a  house  baking  cassava  bread.  These  were 
providing  food  for  the  merry  dancers,  who  were  in  the 
depth  of  the  forest.  But  neither  the  men  nor  the 
women  would  give  the  least  information  to  guide  him 
to  their  rendezvous  ;  and  as  the  Arawaks  were  unac- 
quainted with  the  locality,  he  was  obliged  to  return, 
rightly  judging,  however,  that  if  the  dancers  were 
some  hundreds  in  number,  as  he  had  been  told,  a 
scarcity  of  cassava  would,  in  a  few  days,  break  up 
the  assembly. 

Although  the  crafty  inventors  of  schemes  so  clumsy 


252  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

(as  this  appears  to  us)  could  not  stop  tlie  progress  of 
the  mission,  they  nevertheless,  among  a  people  so 
very  credulous  as  those  poor  Waraus,  contrived  seri- 
ously to  retard  it ;  for  scarcely  was  one  delusion  ended 
than  another  was  set  on  foot. 

The  next  year,  while  our  Christian  Indians  were 
preparing  to  celebrate  the  high  festival  of  Christmas, 
and  a  great  number  of  heathens  were  assembled  to 
join  them,  a  report  was  spread  that  the  Spaniards 
(as  the  Venezuelan  half-breeds  of  the  mission  of 
Santa  Eosa  and  their  countrymen  are  called)  were 
about  to  attack  the  mission  at  Waramuri,  and  slay  all 
the  Indians  there,  in  revenge  for  the  death  of  a  man 
killed  in  a  quarrel  some  time  before.  In  vain  the 
teacher  assured  them  that  there  was  no  truth  in  the 
report.  The  Indians  of  the  other  tribes  believed  him, 
and  remained  quietly  to  celebrate  the  nativity  of  the 
Prince  of  Peace ;  but  the  Waraus  decamped  with 
great  celerity,  as  the  inventors  of  the  report  had 
rightly  judged  they  would.  Not  only  were  our  expec- 
tations disappointed  of  the  good  they  might  have 
received  from  that  day's  services  and  instruction,  but 
their  attendance  was  prevented  and  rendered  irregular 
for  a  considerable  time  after. 

The  enemy  thus  worried  and  impeded  what  he 
could  not  destroy,  and  made  our  labour  more  painful 
and  difficult  with  the  Waraus  than  with  any  tribe 
we  had  yet  reached,  save  the  haughty  and  indolent 
Caribs. 

Their  superstitions  are  in  themselves  a  great 
Ijarrier,  but  this  is  increased,  as  we  have  seen,  by  the 


PROGRESS.  253 

drunkenness  attending  their  assemblies,  which  is 
encouraged  by  their  sorcerers,  in  opposition  to  the 
sobriety  which  the  Gospel  enjoins.  To  these  impedi- 
ments Ave  must  also  add  their  reckless  improvidence. 

The  beautiful  ita  or  Mauritia^  palm,  with  its  crown 
of  fan-like  leaves  waving  over  the  swamps  among 
Avhieli  he  dwells,  is  the  refuge  and  support  of  the 
Warau  in  all  times  of  scarcity.  Having  that  to  fall 
back  upon  he  is  too  often  careless  in  cultivating  the 
land  and  raising  more  Avholesome  food.  Tlie  rij^ening 
of  a  cassava  field  is  frequently  the  signal  for  a  great 
paiwari-making  ;  and  its  produce,  the  Indian's  staff 
of  life,  is  speedily  converted  into  the  means  of  in- 
toxication. Hence  arise  the  savage  murders  from 
time  to  time  committed  among  them,  in  Avliich  the 
poor  women  are  usually  the  victims. 

Their  fondness  for  intoxicatino;  drink  has  long  been 
taken  advantage  of  by  unscrupulous  men,  who  have 

^  ''The  Mauritia  yields  numerous  articles  of  food.  Before 
the  tender  spathe  unfolds  its  blossoms  on  the  male  palm,  and 
only  at  that  particular  period  of  vegetahle  metamorphosis,  the 
medullary  portion  of  the  trunk  is  found  to  contain  a  sago-like 
meal,  "which,  like  that  of  the  jatropha  (or  cassava)  root,  is  dried 
in  thin  bread-like  slices.  The  sap  of  the  tree,  when  fermented, 
constitutes  the  sweet  inebriating  palm-wine  of  the  Guaranes 
(Waraus).  The  narrow  scaled  fruit,  which  resembles  reddish  pine- 
cones,  yields  different  articles  of  food,  according  to  the  period  at 
which  it  is  gathered,  whether  its  saccharine  properties  are  fully 
matured,  or  whether  it  is  still  in  a  farinaceous  condition.  Thus, 
in  the  lowest  grades  of  man's  development,  we  find  the  existence 
of  an  entire  race  dependent  upon  almost  a  single  tree,  like  certain 
insects  which  are  confined  to  particular  portions  of  a  flower." — 
Humboldt's  Views  of  Nature. 


254  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

gone  among  them  to  bring  out  gangs  for  cutting  wood 
or  clearing  bush  on  the  plantations ;  using,  as  their 
means  of  attraction,  large  quantities  of  rum.  After 
a  debauch  they  would  take  them  while  still  under 
the  influence  of  the  liquor,  for  an  Indian  in  that  state 
will  follow  it  anywhere.  After  two  or  three  months' 
work,  attended  with  small  profit,  they  would  be  taken 
back,  and  another  gang  procured  in  the  same  way. 
Labour  thus  conducted  has  been  a  curse  and  not  a 
blessing  to  the  Waraus.  It  is  only  by  the  spread  of 
Christian  knowledge  that  such  evils  can  be  overcome. 

About  the  end  of  1863  the  Indian  tribes  from  the 
far-distant  interior  began  to  visit  our  two  stations. 
Horde  after  horde  of  wild-looking  people,  belonging 
to  races .  which  we  had  scarcely  heard  of,  began  to 
gather  themselves  together  in  the  higher  lands  within 
or  without  our  western  boundary ;  and  to  come  by 
journeys  of  some  weeks'  duration,  that  they  might 
learn  somewhat  of  the  truths  of  Christianity. 

These  events  were  quite  unexpected  by  us.  We 
could  not  have  anticipated  them.  Like  one  or  two 
already  related,  they  were  the  result  of  apparently 
spontaneous  movements  among  the  people  themselves, 
the  course  of  which  will  be  described  in  the  next 
chapter. 


CHAPTEK  V. 

THE      KAPOHN. 

Retrospect — The  AcaAvoios  of  Barahma  duped  by  the  false  Prophet 
of  1845 — Their  Eetm-n — Their  Coming  to  ns — Arrival  of  sus- 
picious-looking Strangers — Unexpected  Eesult — Coming  of 
distant  Acawoios,  Arecunas,  Maiongkongs,  <fec. — Great  Gather- 
ing in  1865  —  Sketch  of  their  Character,  &c.,  and  of  the 
Eegions  inhabited  by  them. 

The  word  Kapolm  (or  Kapong)  which,  like  the 
"  Carinya  "  of  the  Caribs,  in  the  language  of  the  Aca- 
woios signifies  "  the  people/'  is  that  by  which  they 
designate  the  various  branches  of  their  widely- 
extended  and  enterprising  race. 

Their  language,  Avith  its  dialectic  variations,  is 
spread  over  a  vast  territory,  and  they  are  either 
allied  by  blood,  or  have  intercourse  and  traffic,  with 
many  other  tribes  within  and  without  our  boundaries. 

In  a  former  chapter  we  noticed  the  coming  over 
to  us  of  several  families  of  the  Acawoio  nation.  The 
circumstances  which  led  to  their  coming,  and  the 
results  which  followed,  will  be  best  understood  if 
given  in  a  connected  narrative,  though  in  so  doing 
we  must  necessarily  go  back  many  years. 

In  1841  I  had  visited  some  of  this  tribe,  who  then 
resided  at  the  distance  of  two  days'  journey  from  the 


256  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

mission.  That  visit  (related  in  the  first  part  of  this 
work)  had  little  immediate  effect,  as  they  migrated 
soon  after  to  the  Essequibo,  where  the  labours  of 
Mr,  Youd,  Mr.  Bernau,  and  others,  had  already 
attracted  some  of  their  brethren. 

That  period  was  one  of  great  enterprise.  Schom- 
burgk,  starting  from  the  coast  of  Guiana,  had  just 
before  penetrated,  through  strange  desert  regions,  and 
races  little  known,  to  Esmeralda,  on  the  Orinoco. 
Missionary  zeal  was  aroused  to  evangelize  the  Indian 
tribes  throughout  the  territory  thus  laid  open  to  us. 
And  not  without  effect,  for  though  the  labourers  sent 
into  this  wide  field  were  only  two  or  three  in  number, 
and  they  sinking  at  their  posts  from  time  to  time, 
rumours  of  the  word  they  preached  spread  far  and 
wide  among  the  various  races,  and  greatly  excited 
many  who  had  no  opportunity  of  hearing  it 
themselves. 

Far  away  from  all  civilized  settlements,  on  the 
banks  of  the  Upper  Waini,  and  its  beautiful  tributary 
the  Barahma,  there  were  many  Acawoios  then  re- 
siding, who  heard  rumours  of  what  was  taking  place 
in  other  parts  of  the  country,  and  had  their  minds 
aroused  thereby.  Their  habitations,  being  very  dis- 
tant, had  never  been  visited  by  any  missionary  ;  but 
our  enterprising  Post-holder  used  to  undertake  long 
overland  journeys  on  foot  to  their  settlements.  To 
him  they  repeatedly  applied  for  the  establishment  of 
a  mission  among  themselves,  and  so  anxious  were 
they,  that  they  cleared  an  eligible  site,  and  erected 
fifty  cottages,  hoping   that   a  teacher  might  be  sent 


THE  KAPOHN.  257 

to  them :  a  circumstance  which   he   reported  to  the 
Governor. 

Though  their  hopes  were  disappointed,  the  desire 
of  those  Barahma  Acawoios  for  the  knowledge  of  God 
continued  unabated.  We  cannot,  therefore,  greatly 
wonder  that  when,  in  1845,  they  received  a  message 
from  the  impostor  in  the  distant  interior,  who  pre- 
tended to  be  the  Lord  come  down  from  heaven, 
summoning  all  Indians  to  his  presence,  they  should 
readily  have  fallen  into  the  snare. 

I  have  already  related^  the  circumstances  of  that 
imposture,  which  the  reader  will  not  confound  with 
the  petty  delusions  practised  many  years  after  on  the 
"VYaraus,  and  related  in  the  last  chapter.  The  latter 
were  influenced  only  by  sordid  feelings,  and  under- 
went no  privations ;  but  with  the  victims  of  the 
great  imposture  of  1845-6  the  case  was  different. 
Though  all  were  grossly  deceived,  many  among  them 
acted  from  motives  which  were  certainly  of  a  reli- 
gious character,  and  entitled  to  the  respect,  and  even 
sympathy,  of  Christians :  for  they  had  heard  strange 
rumours  of  a  Christ  once  on  earth,  declaring  the 
Great  Father's  will,  and  again  to  come  from  heaven  ; 
but  of  the  warnino;s  He  has  left  us  asfainst  "  false 
Christs  and  false  prophets,"  who  should  "  deceive,  if 
possible,  even  the  elect,"  they  had  not  heard. 

So  Indians  from  all  parts  went  to  the   appointed 

spot.      The   movement   even   affected   the    Caribs   in 

Pomeroon  and  the  neighbouring  rivers  in  a  partial 

degree.     Among  the   more  distant  Acawoios  it  was 

^  Part  I.  cliap.  xi. 

S 


258  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

general,  and  none  more  willingly  undertook  tliat  long 
and  toilsome  journey  "  to  see  God,"  as  they  said,  than 
those  of  the  Barahma. 

Under  their  chief,  Capui  (the  Moon),  they  set  out 
with  their  wives  and  little  children  for  a  far  distant 
land,  where  they  were  told  to  expect  earthly  plenty 
and  salvation  from  destruction.  They  crossed  the 
river  Cuyuni  in  "  wood- skins,"  by  the  aid  of  their 
countrymen  there  ;  and,  being  assisted  by  them  at 
every  settlement  they  came  to,  according  to  the 
fraternal  custom  of  their  tribe,  after  several  weeks' 
journey  they  arrived  at  the  abode  of  the  mysterious 
personage  who  had  summoned  them,  near  the  head 
of  the  Masaruni. 

As  they  approached  that  place  they  saw,  to  their 
surprise,  bananas  growing  without  apparent  cultiva- 
tion ;  a  convincing  proof  to  them  that  they  had  at 
length  reached  the  land  so  highly  blessed  by  "  Mako- 
naima,"  the  great  Lord  and  Maker  of  all. 

They  found  multitudes  of  Indians,  of  their  own 
and  other  nations,  there  assembled,  who  all  listened 
with  deep  and  superstitious  awe  to  the  oracular  man- 
dates and  denunciations  which  proceeded  by  night 
from  the  false  prophet's  chamber,  and  were  trying 
to  keep  up  their  spirits  against  the  approaching  end 
of  the  world  which  he  threatened,  by  dancing  and 
drinking  paiwari  as  fast  as  their  poor  women  could 
make  it. 

At  that  place  they  stayed  some  months,  in  vain 
expectation  of  something  more  satisfactory  to  their 
souls  than  that  which  they  saw  and  heard.     At  length 


THE  KAPOHN.  259 

the  conviction  that  they  had  been  duped  coukl  no 
longer  be  resisted.  In  sadness  and  despondency, 
therefore,  they  retraced  their  steps,  through  a  country 
which  had  become  parched  by  the  terrible  drought 
of  that  year ;  and  at  last  reached  their  deserted 
abodes  and  grass-grown  fields  in  Barahma,  after  an 
absence  of  about  twelve  months. 

A  document,  cunningly  inscribed  with  hieroglyphic 
characters,  had  been  given  to  their  chief  on  his  de- 
parture, which  he  was  told  was  a  commission  from 
Makonaima,  the  Almighty,  to  collect  and  send  to 
that  place  all  the  Indians  he  could  gather.  But,  as 
they  now  attributed  their  delusion  to  the  direct 
agency  of  Satan,  they  feared  to  keep  that  scroll  in 
their  possession,  and  got  rid  of  it  as  soon  as  they 
dared. 

They  had  suffered  much  from  fatigue,  and  after- 
wards by  hunger,  in  consequence  of  that  imposture ; 
but  their  desire  to  acquaint  themselves  with  the 
true  God  was  not  in  the  least  damped  thereby. 
They  were  just  as  ready  as  before  to  undergo 
privations,  and  leave  their  ancient  homes,  could 
they  thereby  draw  nearer  to  Him ;  but  they  knew 
not  whither  to  turn.  To  me  there  has  been  some- 
thing very  touching  in  the  remembrance  of  the  earnest 
desire  of  those  untaught  Indians  in  the  midst  of  the 
darkness  which  they  felt;  their  saying,  by  actions 
more  than  by  words,  "  Oh  that  I  knew  where  I  might 
find  Him,  that   I  might  come  even  to  His  seat." 

A  few  years  afterwards  a  cousin  of  Capui,  who 
bore  the  name  of  Ingles    (or  English),  was  induced 

S  2 


260  THE  INDIAN  TEIBE8  OF  GUIANA. 

by  a  Christian  Acawoio,  named  Edwin,  who  visited 
them,  to  accompany  him  to  the  little  Scotch  mission, 
which  had  been  quietly  working  during  those  years 
at  Indiana,  in  Supenaam,  near  the  mouth  of  the 
Essequibo.  From  thence  he  came  over  to  the  Pome- 
roon,  learning  all  he  could  of  Christianity  on  his 
way,  and  on  his  return  to  Barahma,  his  account  of 
what  he  had  seen  and  learned  induced  his  people 
to  undertake  another  migration — this  time  to  cast 
in  their  lot  with  us. 

Capui  had  died  in  the  interval;  and  his  brother, 
who  had  taken  the  name  of  Hendrick,  was  now  their 
leader.  Being  in  some  doubt  as  to  the  reception  they 
might  meet  with  at  the  mission,  he  wisely  applied 
first  to  Mr.  M'Clintock,  who,  knowing  their  history 
and  the  sincerity  of  their  motives,  gave  them  a  letter 
to  Mr.  Landroy,  our  resident  teacher,  who  was  then 
living,  recommending  him  to  receive  them. 

The  other  Indians  regarded  them  with  great  dis- 
trust, from  the  dread  which  the  evil  name  of  their 
tribe  inspired,  and  which  their  famous  gathering  in 
the  far  interior  had  by  no  means  tended  to  diminish. 
The  new-comers  soon  saw  that  they  were  objects 
of  suspicion  to  the  others  ;  and  accordingly  put 
up  their  humble  lodging-places  in  the  yard  of  the 
mission -house,  thus  placing  themselves  and  their 
children  (whom  they  hoped  to  see  educated)  imme- 
diately under  the  eye  of  the  teacher  and  his 
family. 

I  visited  the  mission  about  this  time,  and  was 
pleased  to  see  those  strangers  (numbering  about  fifty, 


THE  KAPOHN.  261 

of  all  ages)  so  anxiously  desirous  of  Cliristian  instruc- 
tion. But  liow  to  impart  it  was  the  difficulty,  as 
their  lano-uao-e  was  strano^e  to  us.  Ino-les  Avas  their 
spokesman,  but  he  knew  so  little  of  English  that  he 
could  not  understand  me  when  speaking  of  Christian 
truths,  and  I  could  make  nothing  of  the  Kapohn  or 
Acawoio.  The  teacher's  family  then  tried  him  with 
the  Creole-Dutch,  but  that  also  was  a  failure.  We 
were  "  barbarians "  to  each  other  :  his  people  were 
standing  around  much  concerned,  and  I  was  begin- 
ning to  despair  of  any  immediate  good  result,  when 
he  suddenly  addressed  me  by  my  usual  Arawak  title, 
*'  Adaieli,"  and  begged  me  to  speak  in  the  language 
of  the  "  Lokono,"  as  he  could  partly  converse  in  it, 
having  had  much  intercourse  with  Arawaks  in  his 
youth.  This  was  most  fortunate,  as  on  my  departure 
I  could  put  him  into  the  hands  of  Cornelius,  with 
the  certainty  that  he  would  be  well  cared  for. 

In  that  way — mainly  through  the  medium  of  a 
third  ton2;ue — the  rudiments  of  Christian  knowleda:e 
were  imparted,  with  profit  to  them  and  satisfaction 
to  us. 

The  fear  of  danger  from  the  new-comers  was  fast 
dying  away,  when  a  report  was  spread  among  the 
tribes  of  the  massacre  of  the  inhabitants  of  an  Arawak 
settlement  at  Etooni,  on  the  Berbice,  by  some  Acawoios 
(or  Waikas)  who,  according  to  their  custom,  attacked 
the  place  by  night,  slaying  all  they  could,  without 
mercy  to  sex  or  age.  It  was  believed  that  the  mur- 
derers had  been  hired  and  brought  from  Essequibo  by 
persons  of  the  same  nation  as  the  victims,  who  had 


262  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

animosity  against  tlie  head-man  of  the  place,  but 
lacked  courage  to  attack  him  themselves.  He  had 
been  a  hard  drinker,  and  it  was  found  that,  in  deri- 
sion of  that  propensity,  the  assassins  had  placed  an 
empty  flask  under  his  arm,  after  completing  their 
bloody  work.  This  report  was  soon  after  confirmed 
in  its  main  points  by  the  colony  newspapers,  the 
matter  having  been  investigated  by  the  Government. 

This  crime,  perpetrated  by  men  of  their  own  nation, 
as  they  were  considered,  greatly  increased  the  dis- 
comfort of  the  new-comers  at  our  mission,  by  reviving 
the  distrust  with  which  the  other  tribes  regarded  them. 
But  they  behaved  themselves  wisely  and  well ;  gave 
ofi'ence  to  none,  and  made  more  progress,  considering 
their  disadvantages,  than  any  Indians  we  had  yet  seen. 
They  spent  their  leisure  time  at  the  mission,  where 
they  had  placed  their  children  at  school,  but  made 
their  fields  on  the  banks  of  the  Arapaiaco,  which  was 
then  nearly  denuded  of  its  Araw^k  inhabitants  by 
the  mortality  which  had  recently  prevailed  amongst 
them. 

In  a  few  years  they  were  baptized,  not  all  at  once, 
but  successively,  as  they  became  prepared.  I  shall  not 
soon  forget  the  occasion  of  the  baptism  of  Hendrick 
and  his  wife,  with  many  of  the  young  people.  There 
were  nine  young  females,  nearly  all  of  the  same  age, 
and  bearing  a  strong  family  likeness,  whose  clean 
white  muslin  dresses,  neatly  arranged  hair,  and  general 
appearance,  were  a  great  contrast  to  the  condition 
in  which  I  first  beheld  them,  and  showed  a  rapid 
progress  in  civilization. 


THE  KAPOHN.  263 

They  were  very  quiet  and  serious  in  their  demean- 
our ;  gentle  and  affectionate  to  each  other  ;  and 
so  attentive  to  religious  duties  that  it  seemed  to 
us  almost  impossible  that  they  could  be  of  the 
same  blood  with  those  of  whom  we  heard  such 
reports  from  time  to  time.  But  quiet  resolution  and 
strength  of  purpose  seem  to  be  characteristic  of  this 
more  than  of  any  other  aboriginal  tribe  ;  and  they 
enter  thoroughly  into  whatever  business  they  take 
in  hand,  whether  it  be  for  evil  or  for  good.  So  at 
least  we  found  it  with  this  clan,  then  separate 
from  all  their  brethren.  Having  believed  and  em- 
braced Christianity  they  were  evidently  trying  to 
live  up  to  it.  Of  those  who  first  came  to  us,  there 
remained,  in  a  few  years,  not  one  unbaptized,  nor 
a  couple  unmarried  ;  and  the  young  people,  as  each 
became  old  enough,  ratified  their  baptismal  vows, 
and  were  confirmed  by  the  Bishop  in  his  successive 
visitations,  preparatory  to  approaching  the  Table  of 
the  Lord. 

The  Arawaks  and  Caribs  at  our  missions  at  that 
time  possessed  over  these  Acawoios  the  advantage 
not  only  of  knowing  more  English,  but  also  of  having 
various  little  translations  which  I  had  made  for  the 
benefit  of  those  individuals  (very  numerous  in  the 
purely  Indian  territory)  who  could  not  understand  it. 
The  Lord's  Prayer,  Apostles'  Creed,  &c.,  had  been 
printed  in  those  two  languages  by  the  Society  for 
Promoting  Christian  Knowledge,  on  a  sheet  with  an 
illustrated  border,  representing,  in  small  medallions, 
some  of  the  chief  events  of  the  Old  Testament  history 


264  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

and  the  life  of  our  Lord.  Some  hundreds  of  these 
had  been  distributed,  but  as  yet  the  Acawoios  had 
nothing  of  the  kind. 

One  of  their  young  men,  named  Philip,  the  son  of 
their  late  chief  Capui,  became  desirous  of  benefiting 
his  own  people  in  a  similar  way.  To  accomplish  his 
purpose,  he  went  and  lived  some  months  in  the  country 
of  the  Caribs,  whose  language  approaches  nearest  to 
his  own ;  and  when  he  found  himself  able  to  translate 
their  creed  into  Acawoio,  he  offered  his  services  to  me, 
which,  I  need  scarcely  say,  were  accepted  with  equal 
joy  and  surprise.  This  was  in  1861.  The  Society,  with 
its  usual  liberality,  soon  after  printed  for  us  several 
hundred  copies  of  the  illustrated  sheets  in  Acawoio, 
and  also  in  Warau,  which  latter  translation  I  had 
been  enabled  (after  experiencing  great  difficulty  from 
the  poverty  of  that  language  and  other  causes)  to 
complete  about  the  same  time. 

Our  Acawoios  had  lived  in  comparative  isolation 
from  the  rest  of  their  nation  about  ten  years,  since 
they  first  came  to  us.  But  in  the  year  1863  this 
isolation  was  broken  by  a  movement  among  their 
heathen  countrymen,  which  at  first  gave  us  some 
anxiety. 

In  the  month  of  August,  in  that  year,  a  rumour 
reached  Waramuri,  where  I  then  was,  that  the 
Acawoios  and  their  allies  in  the  distant  interior  had 
risen  in  arms,  and  were  approaching  the  missions, 
destroying  the  Indian  settlements  on  their  way. 
Mr.  Campbell  and  myself  set  it  down  as  one  of  those 
panics  which   continually  arise   among   the    Indians 


THE  KAPOHN.  265 

from  tlie  slightest  causes,  and  it  proved  to  be 
untrue,  though  a  movement  of  some  kind  was  really 
g'oino^  on. 

When  I  reached  the  Pomeroon  Mission  on  my 
return,  however,  I  found  that  the  Christian  Acawoios 
had  taken  to  flight  the  morning  before,  alarmed  at 
the  appearance  of  a  party  of  their  heathen  country- 
men, who  had  arrived  at  the  mission  in  the  darkness, 
and  were  discovered  hovering  about  their  open  houses 
at  the  first  faint  gleam  of  approaching  day.  This 
party  consisted  of  an  old  man  and  four  others,  Avho 
seemed  to  be  his  sons ;  all  being  very  wild,  and 
adorned  in  savage  style.  Our  people  recognised  the 
old  man  as  belonging  to  a  family  which,  in  the 
prosecution  of  a  feud,  had  sought  the  blood  of  their 
fathers  for  some  generations,  and  considering  their 
object  to  be  assassination,  and  not  knowing  how 
many  supporters  they  might  have  at  hand,  judged 
it  best  to  seek  present  safety  by  a  hasty  retreat. 

The  wild  strangers  then  took  possession  of  their 
houses,  caught  a  fowl,  and  killed  it  for  their  break- 
fast. Apparently  regarding  all  around  as  lawful 
spoil,  they  were  proceeding  to  scatter  Indian  corn 
and  catch  the  other  poultry  which  they  saw  near, 
when  the  schoolmistress  claimed  them,  and  they 
desisted  at  her  request. 

For  three  or  four  days  they  kept  the  mission  in 
great  uneasiness,  hovering  about  and  showing  them- 
selves from  time  to  time.  During  that  period,  how- 
ever, they  had  full  opportunity  of  seeing  the  mission 
chapel  -  school,    and    what   was    doing    there.      The 


266  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

Indian  children  reading  English  struck  them  with 
amazement,  and  they  felt  a  desire,  and  were  invited, 
to  share  the  same  advantages. 

From  the  time  of  the  visit  of  those  strangers,  the 
Acawoios  from  the  far-distant  interior  began  to  come 
to  our  two  missions. 

To  that  in  Pomeroon  there  came  in  the  following 
year  many  from  the  Cuyuni,  who  had  a  long  over- 
land journey  to  accomplish  in  order  to  reach  us. 
They  had  come  to  see  and  judge  for  themselves ;  and 
when  they  left  they  took  with  them  a  number  of 
the  illustrated  sheets  from  which  they  had  been 
taught  at  the  mission.  "  In  seven  months,"  they 
said,  "  we  shall  have  reaped  our  provisions  in  Cuyuni, 
and  we  will  then  come  and  live  with  you."  One  poor 
old  woman  preferred  to  stay  behind,  fearing  that  if 
she  undertook  the  fatigues  of  that  long  journey  she 
might  not  live  to  return. 

At  the  sister  mission  of  Waramuri  there  was  a 
similar  influx.  A  few  Acawoios,  who  had  embraced 
Christianity,  had  been  abeady  living  there  for  some 
time,  of  whom  Hughes  (who  killed  the  large  black 
tiger,  as  I  have  mentioned  in  a  former  chapter)  was 
the  chief.  There  had  been  no  prospect  of  any  addi- 
tion to  their  numbers,  for  there  were  no  more  ^\TLthin 
several  days'  journey. 

But  now  there  suddenly  came  from  the  Waini  and 
its  tributary  streams  almost  as  many  as  had  come  to 
Pomeroon  from  the  Cuyuni ;  and  the  class  of  Aca- 
woios receiving  instruction  at  that  mission  suddenly 
increased  from  five  or  six  to  sixty. 


THE  KAPOHN.  267 

The  teachers  and  people  at  both  stations  were 
surprised  at  this  movement.  "  We  did  not  fetch 
these  people,  but  God  hath  brought  them  to  us,"  was 
the  remark  of  all. 

It  soon  appeared  as  if  the  Acawoios,  by  their  ex- 
tensive intercourse  with  other  tribes,  held  the  key 
of  the  interior,  and  were  doing  their  best  to  bring 
the  other  nations  to  the  knowledge  of  the  great  truths 
of  Christianity. 

Those  who  visited  Waramuri  brought  with  them 
some  of  the  very  distant  tribe  of  JMaiong-kongs  :  and 
a  few  months  later  there  came  to  the  same  mission 
a  large  party,  about  seventy  in  number,  of  mixed 
Acawoios  and  (to  our"  surprise)  Arecunas,  The  latter, 
whom  we  had  not  seen  before,  had  journeyed  from 
the  high  lands  between  the  heads  of  the  Cuyuni  and 
the  Caroni,  a  large  tributary  of  the  Orinoco.  They 
had  come  from  thence  to  the  head  of  the  Waini, 
where  they  had  cut  down  some  large  trees  and  made 
"  wood-skin  "  canoes,  as  they  are  called.  These  wood- 
skins  are  formed  by  stripping  off  the  bark  of  the 
mariwayani,  or  purple- heart,  in  one  large  piece, 
forcing  it  open  in  the  middle,  and  fixing  sticks  across 
it : — downward  slits  being  cut  near  the  extremities, 
which  are  supported  on  beams  till  the  bark  be  dry, 
to  give  them  a  slight  spring  above  the  surface  of  the 
water.  In  those  frail  barks  they  had  descended  the 
Waini,  and  come  through  the  connecting  streams  to 
our  mission. 

Those  strangers  were  fine  stalwart  men,  with  clear 
copper-tinted   skins,   and   larger  in    person  than  the 


268  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

Indians  near  the  coast.  Thougli  not  greatly  encum- 
bered with  clothing,  they  possessed  unusual  attractions 
in  the  way  of  ornament.  They  wore  long  sticks 
through  the  cartilage  of  the  nostrils,  and  had  still 
longer  ones,  very  handsomely  adorned  with  tufts  of 
black  feathers  at  the  extremities,  fixed  throuo^h  their 
ears.  Evidently  they  were  most  attentive  to  their  per- 
sonal appearance,  and  they  made  a  great  sensation. 

For  our  Indians,  unaccustomed  to  such  an  extreme 
style  of  adornment,  were  alarmed  at  the  sight ;  the 
Waraus  especially,  who,  with  their  usual  cowardice,  im- 
mediately quitted  the  mission,  and  did  not  return  in 
any  numbers  till  the  stalwart  strangers  had  departed. 

The  Arecunas,  however,  though  formidable  in  ap- 
pearance, behaved  like  amiable  savages,  and  as  soon 
as  they  saw  the  alarm  their  presence  had  excited, 
they  laid  aside  such  of  their  cherished  ornaments  as 
they  could. 

But  both  sexes  had  their  countenances  much 
tattooed,  and  those  facial  ornaments  were,  of  course, 
indelible.  Some  of  the  women  had  the  dark  blue 
lines  traced  across  the  upper  lip,  and  extending  in 
wavy  curves  over  either  cheek,  resembling  immense 
curled  moustachios ;  but  the  favourite  style  seemed 
to  be  a  broad  line  round  the  mouth,  so  wide  that 
each  lip  appeared  to  be  an  inch  broader,  and  the  aper- 
ture itself  two  inches  longer  than  nature  had  made 
it.  Those  apparently  enormous  mouths  could  not  be 
laid  aside,  nor  had  the  poor  creatures,  otherwise  fine- 
looking  women,  any  means  of  procuring  clothes,  to 
soften  the  disagreeable  impression  produced. 


cv 


&M 


d^X' 


THE  KAPOHN,  269 

But,  barbarous  as  the  appearance  of  both  men  and 
women  might  seem  to  us,  there  was  no  mistaking 
their  single-minded  purpose.  They  stayed  at  the 
mission,  attending  prayers  and  instruction,  till  their 
means  of  subsistence  were  exhausted.  During  the 
last  few  days  I  paid  my  usual  visit,  and  they  were 
taught  by  some  zealous  young  Acawoios  of  my  crew : 
one  of  whom,  named  Thomas,  had  a  fair  knowledge  of 
the  English  New  Testament,  and  was  engaged  in  com- 
municating it  to  them  by  night  as  Avell  as  by  day. 

A.t  length  it  was  necessary  to  pronounce  the  final 
blessing ;  and  while  we  turned  the  head  of  our  boat 
down  the  river  towards  the  cultivated  coast,  they 
embarked  in  their  wood-skins,  again  to  thi'ead  the 
network  of  streams,  re-ascend  the  AVaini,  and  return 
overland  to  their  far  distant  homes  : — there  to  spread, 
as  we  humbly  trusted,  the  knowledge  at  least  of  their 
Saviour's  name,  in  a  part  of  the  interior  as  yet 
unexplored  by  civilized  man. 

The  brother  of  one  of  our  recent  Acawoio  converts 
was  murdered  about  this  time  on  the  banks  of  Mana- 
warin.  The  deed  was  perpetrated  by  a  "Kanaima" 
devotee,  in  the  usual  manner,  and  close  to  the  Indian 
settlement.  A  loud  shout  was  heard  in  the  forest, 
and  when  the  friends  of  the  victim  ran  to  the  spot, 
they  found  him  on  the  ground,  with  his  back  and 
neck  bruised,  but  not  bleeding.  He  had  been  de- 
prived of  speech  by  the  murderer  according  to  the 
cruel  system  followed  in  those  crimes  (which  are  per- 
petrated, where  possible,  according  to  strict  rule),  and 
left  to  linger  till  death  released  him.      A  Carib  in 


270  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

another  district  was  also  said  to  have  been  murdered 
not  long  before.  These  things  account  for  the  frequent 
panics  among  the  Indians. 

In  the  former  instance  the  deed  was  thought  to 
be  in  fulfilment  of  a  threat  of  the  heathen  sorcerers, 
to  "kanaima"  in  detail  all  the  Acawoios  and  others 
who  dared  to  attend  Christian  instruction,  either  at 
our  missions  or  at  Supenaam. 

In  August  following,  our  good  Bishop  again  visited 
the  missions.  This  visit  was  remarkable  beyond 
former  ones  for  the  great  numbers  of  Indians  assem- 
bled at  each  station.  At  Cabacaburi  about  600  must 
have  been  present — at  Waramuri  there  were  many- 
more  :  881  of  five  nations  having  been  counted 
at  one  time.  Stragglers,  and  those  who  came  after, 
made  the  total  number  approach  1,000. 

A  new  chapel  had  been  erected  at  the  latter 
mission,  the  Indians  there  also  having  contributed  ex- 
cellent timber  for  the  frame,  and  given  their  labour 
freely  in  its  erection.  But  it  could  not  hold  one- 
half  the  number  present  at  its  opening,  and  hundreds 
were  standing  in  groups  outside.  We  were  three  days 
at  this  mission,  unceasingly  engaged  in  examining  cate- 
chumens, administering  holy  ordinances,  and  giving 
instruction  to  the  difierent  nations  (for  the  latter 
purpose  taking  each  separately),  and  it  was  an  un- 
speakable comfort  to  us  that  each  person  had  heard 
something  of  Divine  truth  in  his  own  tongue  ere 
he  departed.  My  young  Acawoios  showed  their  usual 
zeal,  and  we  saw  them  from  a  distance  teaching 
their  people  by  moonlight  as  before. 


THE  KAPOHN.  271 

The  children  at  this  mission  had  been  accustomed 
from  the  days  of  their  late  kind  teacher,  Mr.  Wadie, 
to  have  an  annual  fete,  the  amusements  being  such 
as  Indians  would  engage  in, — archery,  foot-races,  and 
leaping.  Our  Campus  Martins  was  a  clear  sandy 
space  between  the  chapel  and  the  mission-house. 
On  this  occasion  we  had  more  than  two  hundred 
archers,  every  young  man  present  bringing  his  bow. 
I  am  rather  ashamed  to  mention  the  prizes,  which 
were  of  less  intrinsic  value  than  the  corruptible  crown 
of  the  Isthmian  games,  and  by  no  means  so  elegant, 
being  either  saltjish,  or  silver  coins  of  different  value, 
according  to  the  excellence  of  the  shot ; — the  former, 
of  which  the  Indians  are  very  fond,  being  preferred  by 
them.  The  target  was  also  shabby,  though  the  best 
we  could  extemporize,  being  a  j^iece  of  dark  paste- 
board, with  a  circle  and  bull's-eye  marked  with  chalk, 
in  the  absence  of  paint. 

In  the  shooting,  we  were  glad  to  see  the  boys  of 
the  mission-school  distinguish  themselves,  one  of  them 
first  piercing  the  white,  and  showing  the  assembled 
Indians  that  instruction  in  Christian  truth,  and  the 
acquired  power  of  reading  and  writing  the  English 
language  in  some  degree,  did  not  make  their  sons 
worse  marksmen. 

After  several  rounds  from  each  man  and  boy,  the 
archery  contest  closed  by  a  simultaneous  discharge 
of  arrows  from  every  bow.  More  than  two  hundred 
shafts  flying  through  the  air  together  presented  a 
novel  spectacle,  and  in  an  instant  demolished  the 
target,   amidst  loud  shouts  from  all.     A  dog,  which 


272  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

•unheeded  had  wandered  behind  it  just  before,  was  sur- 
rounded by  the  crop  of  arrows  which  suddenly  stuck 
in  the  sand,  some  even  beneath  him.  He  was  a  lucky 
dog,  however,  for  with  marvellous  fortune  he  escaped 
unhurt ;  though  bewildered  by  the  adventure,  and  the 
roar  of  applause  which  followed  his  somewhat  hasty 
retirement,  with  deprecating  look  and  drooping  tail, 
from  the  arena. 

The  wild  rush  and  cry  of  those  young  men,  as, 
headed  by  the  Caribs,  they  sprang  forward  to  recover 
their  arrows,  helped  us  to  form  some  idea  of  those 
whirlwind-like  onslaughts  with  which,  in  the  bloody 
battles  of  former  days,  their  fathers  attacked  each 
other ;  and  sometimes,  rushing  from  an  ambuscade, 
would  cause  the  destruction  of  even  veteran  European 
soldiers. 

The  next  day  the  Bishop,  Mr.  Campbell,  and  myself, 
started  for  the  Waini,  crossing  the  Moruca  swamps, 
and  proceeding  afterwards  through  a  series  of  streams, 
which  at  that  season  have  no  visible  banks ;  the 
higher  portions  of  the  roots  of  the  dense  forest-trees 
appearing  above  the  water,  but  scarcely  any  of  the 
earth  from  which  they  grow.  This  is  the  nature  of 
the  whole  district  extending  from  the  Pomeroon  to 
the  great  Orinoco,  which  was  well  called  by  ancient 
navigators  "  the  wild  coast ;" — a  desolate  region,  which 
civilized  man  has  not  yet  thought  fit  to  occupy,  but 
has  left  to  the  aboriginal  inhabitants.  Here  and 
there,  by  ascending  narrow  and  difficult  creeks,  you 
may  find  a  spot  a  little  more  elevated,  and  an  Indian 
shed  in  which  you  may  sleep,  but  the  borders  of  the 


THE  KAPOHN.  27 ^ 

rivers  are  in  a  state  of  inundation  for  many  months 
during  each  year. 

The  tide  being  against  us  in  tlie  Barimani  on  the 
second  day,  we  tried  to  land  on  a  spot  where  the 
roots  seemed  somewhat  higher,  and  tied  a  hammock 
between  the  trees  for  Mr.  Campbell,  who  had  fallen 
sick.  But,  though  the  Indians  made  a  rude  plat- 
form of  sticks  and  branches  beneath  it,  the  damp 
compelled  the  invalid's  return  to  the  boat.  Insects, 
however,  appeared  to  thrive  there,  though  man  could 
not.  Huge  black  forest  spiders  abounded,  living  in 
apparently  friendly  communities ;  and  some  golden- 
tinted  threads  of  a  web,  with  which  I  came  in 
contact,  were  stout  enough  for  me  to  bring  away, 
wound  on  a  paper  as  silk  is  wound. 

Above  the  mouth  of  the  Barimani,  the  banks  of 
the  Waini  become  gradually  higher,  and  the  camping 
grounds  good ;  until  in  four  or  five  days'  voyage  its 
romantic  falls  are  reached.^  We  were  unable  to 
extend  our  voyage  so  far. 

^  Mr.  M'Clintock,  the  only  white  man  who  has  yet  explored  that 
comparatively  unknown  region,  says  that  the  Aqueari  Falls  of  the 
Waini  differ  from  all  others  he  has  seen. 

Their  height  is  ahout  25  feet,  and  their  breadth  about  750. 
The  rocks  over  which  they  rush  are  formed  into  three  steps,  so 
very  regular  as  to  give  them  the  appearance  of  masonry. 

Although  the  body  of  water  here  precipitated  is  very  great,  it 
has  failed  in  opening  for  itself  a  direct  channel.  This  is  partly 
owing  to  the  great  height  of  the  lauds  immediately  fronting  the 
falls,  but  chiefly  to  the  circumstance  of  their  being  faced  throughout 
by  immense  boulders.  The  waters  thus  opposed,  dashing  against  the 
boulders  and  receding  with  almost  equal  violence,  have  formed  at 
the  foot  of  the  falls  a  basin  about  300  yards  square,  which  is  always 
much  agitated,  and  during  heavy  rains  dangerous  for  small  craft. 

T  After 


274  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

Space  would  fail  me  were  I  to  describe  all  the 
events  of  tbis  (to  us)  most  interesting,  and,  I  may 
add,  fatiguing  expedition.  How  on  our  return  we 
got  tlie  boat  firmly  fixed  in  pusbing  tbrougb  tbe 
sballow  swamp  of  Koraia,  and  all  bad  to  labour 
for  some  bours  amidst  rain  and  tbunder  in  forcing 
ber  on ;  bow  we  next  lost  tbe  proper  cbannel,  and 
fortunately  recovered  it  just  before  darkness  came 
on ;  bow  we  collected  all  tbe  inbabitants  of  Wakapoa 
wbo  still  remained  in  beatbenism  at  a  settlement 
opposite  the  scene  of  tbe  great  Maquarri  dance  of 
twenty-tbree  years  before,  and  tbe  result  of  tbat 
meeting;  with  many  otber  matters,  we  cannot  bere 
furtber  describe. 

After  the  descending  torrent  has  here  exhausted  its  fury  against 
the  rocks,  it  escapes  at  last  by  a  passage  on  the  left  side  of  not 
more  than  twelve  or  fifteen  feet  in  width,  the  Avaters  of  which  are 
strangely  placid.  This  narrow  passage, — so  still, — so  thickly  shaded 
and  gloomy,  leads  the  voyager  ascending  the  stream  to  imagine  at 
the  moment  that  he  is  entering  some  place  still  more  dark  and 
gloomy  than  the  passage  itself.  This  feeling  is  soon  dispelled. 
A  trifling  exertion  of  his  boatmen  will  convey  him,  as  if  by 
magic,  into  a  very  different  scene — the  wide  basin  of  foaming 
waters. 

Quartz  abounds  on  the  right  side  of  these  falls,  and  granite  on 
the  left.  The  land  is  very  high,  and  on  one  side  of  the  narrow 
gorge  a  delicious  spring  trickles  from  the  summit,  and  offers  its 
refreshing  waters  to  the  passers-by. 

The  Indians,  after  passing  these  falls,  ascend  the  Waini  for  six 
hours  more,  to  a  place  called  Emoti.  Thence,  crossing  the  Imalaca 
range,  they  can  descend  into  the  valley  of  the  Cuyuni.  A  journey 
of  twenty  hours  brings  them  to  the  settlement  of  the  Acawoio 
chief, — twelve  hours  more  to  the  mouth  of  the  Eruma  on  the 
Cuyuni,  which  is  about  sixteen  hours'  voyage  from  the  penal 
settlement  near  the  mouth  of  that  river. 


THE  KAPOHN.  275 

No  such  assemblies  of  Indians  liad  been  seen  for 
many  years  as  tliose  we  met  on  that  occasion.  Many 
had  come  from  an  immense  distance :  the  Acawoios, 
who  were  thoroughly  in  earnest,  having  stirred  np 
the  other  tribes.  Serrawyk,  their  old  white-bearded 
chief  from  Cuyiuii,  afterwards  repeatedly  undertook 
that  fatiguing  journey. 

The  following  account  of  the  Kapohn,  or  Acawoios, 
is  from  the  pen  of  Mr.  M'Clintock,  and  the  result  of 
actual  observation  during  an  acquaintance  of  many 
years.  It  will  be  seen  that,  though  so  dreaded  by 
the  other  tribes  in  their  uncivilized  and  lieathen 
state,  they  possess  many  domestic  virtues  for  which 
they  have  not  hitherto  received  credit.  Mr.  M'Clin- 
tock indeed  considers  them  in  this  respect  superior 
to  all  other  aboriginal  races  he  has  known. 

"  The  Acawoio  Indians  dijffer  from  other  tribes  in 
many  points,  a  few  of  which  arc  as  follow  : — First, 
with  respect  to  pohjcjamy  (so  common  to  Caribs  and 
AYaraus,  and,  before  the  missions  were  established, 
ecjually  so  to  Arawaks),  it  is  unknown  among  them.^ 
Secondly,  no  alliances  are  permitted  before  a  suitable 
age.  Thirdly,  Acawoio  women  are  decidedly  vir- 
tuous, and  attentive  both  in  sickness  and  old  age. 
After  a  birth  the  mother  is  relieved  from  every 
description  of  labour,  even  that  of  preparing  food  for 
her  husband,  for  the  space  of  five  days  ;  not  from  any 
superstitious  motive,  however,  but  simply  because  an 
infant  requires  the  mother's  whole  care  and  attention 

^  Some  few  of  the  AVaika  branch  of  their  nation  arc,  liowever, 
said  to  practise  it. 

T   1 


-276  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

during  that  period.  In  their  domestic  arrangements 
the  Acawoios  are  cleanly,  and  (like  all  the  Indian  tribes 
in  this  province)  passionately  fond  of  their  children  ; 
hospitable  to  every  one ;  and/  among  themselves, 
generous  to  a  fault. 

''  Acawoios  by  themselves,  unless  much  excited, 
seldom  talk  above  a  whisper ;  and  at  their  orgies 
(happily  now  of  rare  occurrence),  however  intoxicated 
they  may  be,  never  quarrel ;  nay  more,  an  angry  look, 
as  such,  is  never  observable.  On  the  whole,  a  more 
orderly  and  peaceably  disposed  people  can  scarcely 
be  found  anywhere. 

"  Both  sexes  make  almost  continual  use  of  tobacco, 
which  may  account  for  their  having,  generally 
speaking,  good  teeth. 

"  Their  mode  of  preparing  the  '  weed'  for  chewing 
is  as  follows.  They  take  from  the  stalk  as  many 
green  leaves  as  will  cover  the  pan  on  which  their 
cassava  is  baked ;  over  this  layer  of  tobacco-leaves 
they  sprinkle  salt,  then  another  layer  of  green  leaves, 
and  salt  as  before ;  this  must  be  repeated  till  the 
whole  becomes  one  inch  or  more  in  thickness.  A 
slow  fire  is  then  applied  to  the  pan,  and  after  the 
cake  (if  such  it  may  be  called)  is  partially  heated,  it 
is  removed,  and  distributed  among  a  number  of  small 
calabashes,  where  it  remains  till  '  quids '  be  in 
demand ;  not,  however,  to  be  chewed,  but  to  be  kept 
simply  between  the  lips.  By  this  method  the  teeth 
are  preserved,  hunger  appeased  (Indians  always  assure 
me  of  this,  saying,  '  When  I  have  tobacco  I  never 
feel  hungry'),  and  thirst  is  quenched." 


THE  KAPOHN.  277 

Such  is  tlie  account  of  those  people  given  by 
Mr.  M'Clintock,  whose  various  journeys,  distant  ex- 
peditions in  their  company,  and  long  intercourse, 
have  given  him  a  most  intimate  acquaintance  with 
them. 

The  localities  inhabited  by  the  Acawoios  extend 
from  the  Essequibo  and  its  tributaries,  westward  and 
north-westward,  round  to  the  heads  of  the  Waini, 
Barahma,  and  Barima.  Others  live  to  the  eastward 
on  the  Upper  Demerara  and  Berbice.  That  branch 
of  the  Kapohn  is  called  Waika^  by  some;  others 
incorrectly  give  that  name  to  the  entire  race. 

The  Arecunas,  mentioned  in  this  chapter,  dwell 
on  the  high  table-land  from  which  the  castle-like 
rocks  of  Mount  Roraima  rise  7,500  feet  above  the 
level  of  the  sea.  The  historians  Montiero  and  Ribiero 
describe  them  as  cannibals,  and  say  that  "  they  per- 
forate their  ears,  in  which  they  wear  haulms  of  gi'ass ; 
and  that  they  use  quippos  or  knotted  strings,   like 

1  "  Guaica,"  as  written  by  the  Spaniards.  There  is  a  tribe  of 
the  same  name,  the  people  of  which,  as  described  by  Hiimboldt, 
are  of  short  stature,  fair  skins,  and  savage  habits,  and  with  a 
confederate  tribe,  the  Guaharibos,  prevented  all  access  to  the 
sources  of  the  Orinoco.  Bridging  the  cataracts  from  rock  to  rock 
with  lianas,  and  concealing  themselves  beliind  crags  and  trees  on 
the  steep  banks,  they  directed  their  arrows,  tipped  with  the  most 
deadly  ourali,  against  all  strangers.  Military  expeditions  were 
unable  to  ascend,  and  the  Franciscan  missionaries  fared  no  better. 
I  have  not  hitherto  been  able  to  ascertain  whether  those  Guaicas 
are  of  the  same  race  as  ours,  or  accidentally  resemble  them  in 
name. 

Schomburgk,  coming  from  the  eastward,  was  also  prevented  from 
reaching  the  sources  of  the  Orinoco  by  the  ferocity  of  the  Kirishauas 
who  infest  that  quarter. 


278  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

the  Peruvians,  by  wliicli  they  communicate  not  only 
numbers  but  likewise  sentences  to  each  other."  They 
certainly  indulge  to  a  considerable  extent  in  the 
luxury  of  perforating  and  wearing  strange  ornaments 
in  their  ears,  and  they  are  said  still  to  use  the 
quippos ;  but  they  are  no  longer  cannibals. 

The  Arecunas  would  seem  to  be  very  fond  of  orna- 
ments, and  to  use  a  greater  variety  than  most  other 
tribes.  Schomburgk,  who  visited  their  mountain 
country,  speaks  of  a  party  as  wearing  in  their  ears 
birds'  heads  (chiefly  those  of  the  humming-bird),  and 
a  small  creeper  of  a  brilliant  blue  colour.  Their 
girdles  were  of  monkeys'  hair. 

At  one  of  their  villages  they  made  a  great  feast 
ill  honour  of  that  traveller,  who  says,  "  Feasting  and 
dancing  by  the  natives,  dressed  in  their  gayest  orna- 
ments, lasted  the  whole ,  night ;  and  the  constantly- 
repeated  burden  of  their  song  was,  '  Eoraima  of  the 
red  rocks,  wrapped  in  clouds,  the  ever-fertile  source 
of  streams.' "  On  that  occasion  there  was  a  grand 
display  of  gorgeous  plumes  and  head-dresses ;  the 
whole  winged  tribe  having  apparently  been  put  in 
requisition  to  furnish  forth  the  most  brilliant  of  their 
feathers.  They  had  also  necldaces  of  monkeys'  teeth, 
peccary  teeth,  and  porcupines'  quills,  to  which  were 
attached  long  cotton  fringes  that  hung  down  their 
backs,  and  suspended  squirrel,  toucan,  and  various 
other  skins. 

We  thought  that  the  party  who  came  to  Wara- 
muri  Mission  were  elaborately  adorned  for  the  visit, 
but  they  probably  wore  only  their  every-day  attire. 


THE  KAPOUN.  279 

It  may  assist  tlie  reader  in  forming  some  idea  of 
the  reaion  from  which  our  wild-lookino-  visitors 
oame,  and  of  the  various  tribes  which  inhabit  it,  if 
he  will,  in  imagination,  place  himself  in  some  central 
spot,  in  the  country  of  the  Arecunas,  for  instance ; 
the  hioh  land  near  Mount  Roraima.^ 

o 

1  Scliombui'glc's  party  liad  a  fine  view  of  Eoraima  from  an  eleva- 
tion of  3,700  feet  above  the  principal  Arecuna  village,  Arawayam. 
Its  steep  sides  rose  to  a  height  of  1,500  feet  above  them.  Those 
sides,  of  compact  sandstone,  are  as  perpendicular  as  if  erected  with 
the  plumb-line,  and  are  overhimg  in  part  with  low  shrubs.  The 
most  remarkable  feature  of  those  rocks  is  the  precipitation  from 
their  enormous  heights  of  waters  which  flow  in  different  directions 
into  three  great  rivers,  the  Amazon,  Orinoco,  and  Essequibo. 

The  whole  scenery  of  that  high  and  rocky  watershed,  and  of  the 
livers  which  flow  from  it,  is  extremely  grand  and  i^icturesque. 
Ilillhoiise,  "who  explored  a  great  part  of  the  !Masaruni,  speaks  of 
perpendicular  cliffs  1,000  or  1,500  feet  in  height,  which  the 
traveller  knows  to  be  distant,  but  which  seem  as  if  in  dangerous 
})roximity.  "  You  see  all  around  you  detached  masses,  apparently 
torn  from  those  gigantic  walls  of  nature,  and  expect  every  moment 
to  see  one  of  them  block  up  the  path  before  you,  or  cut  off  your 
retreat," — The  channel  is  at  some  places  narrowed  by  those  blocks, 
so  that  the  canoe  can  barely  pass,  at  others  it  widens  into  a  shallow 
claret-coloured  lake. — "At  last  you  enter  a  capacious  basin,  black  as 
ink,  surrounded  by  a  bold  and  extensive  sandy  shore,  as  wdiite  as 
chalk ;  and  you  hear  a  fall  of  water  before  you,  but  perceive  no 
current,  though  there  is  a  foam  like  yeast  on  the  surface,  which 
remains  all  day  without  visible  alteration.  On  a  more  attentive 
examination  you  perceive  at  a  distance  a  broken  white  line 
struggling  through  a  cluster  of  granite  rocks,  at  the  base  of  two 
quartz  cliffs  of  a  mixed  cliaracter,  and  this  is  the  Fall  of  Macrebah." 

Some  distance  higher  is  the  Fall  of  Coomarow,  Avhere  the  body 
of  water  descends  from  a  (supposed)  height  of  GOO  feet.  Eoraima 
is  several  "days"  beyond  this  fall. 

The  Cuyuni  is  not  so  picturesque  as  the  Masaruni,  but  is  even 
more  difficult  and  dangerous  to  ascend. 


280  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

He  would  then  liave  to  tlie  northward  the  sources 
of  the  Cuyuni  and  some  of  its  tributaries.  That 
river  describes  a  wide  cui^ve  in  its  course,  with  many 
falls  and  rapids,  until  it  joins  the  Masaruni,  and 
their  united  waters  flow  into  the  Essequibo.  Many 
Acaivoios  dwell  on  the  banks  of  the  Cuyuni,  and 
the  Kamarohotos  are  located  near  its  head. 

To  the  eastward  of  Eoraima  are  the  Masaruni  and 
its  tributaries,  winding  downwards  to  the  north-east 
to  meet  the  Essequibo. 

The  following  tribes  are  enumerated  by  Mr. 
M'Clintock  as  dwelling  on  or  near  that  river  :  the 
Quatimko  ;  Yaramuna ;  Etoeko  ;  Passonho  ;  Koma- 
rani ;  Kouhohinko ;  and  Skamana.  The  Cuyai^ako 
live  near  its  head,  and  towards  the  Caroni.  From 
inquiries  I  have  made,  most  of  these  appear  to  be 
mere  subdivisions  of  the  Kapohn ;  difi^ering  slightly 
in  dialect  and  in  other  respects,  and  taking  their 
names  from  the  districts  in  which  they  dwell. 

Southward  of  Eoraima  the  great  range  of  the  Pa- 
caraima  Mountains  extends  from  east  to  west ;  and 
beyond  it  are  the  savannahs  of  the  Eupununi,  inha- 
bited by  the  Wabean  or  Wapisiana  nation,  the 
Macusis,  mentioned  in  the  former  part  of  this  work, 
the  Atorais  and  others. 

On  the  west  of  Eoraima  the  Caroni  takes  its  rise, 
and  turning  towards  the  north  flows  into  the  Ori- 
noco. Still  farther  to  the  west,  on  the  Marewari 
and  other  streams  near  the  head  of  the  Orinoco, 
reside  the  Guinaus  or  Kenous,  and  the  Mianho  or 
Maiongkongs. 


THE  KAPOHN.  281 

With  all  the  above  nations  the  Acawoios  are  con- 
nected by  blood  or  alliance,  and  hold  continual 
intercourse. 

ISToTE. — The  story,  first  mentioned  by  Orellana,  of  the  existence 
of  a  tribe  of  Amazons,  or  Avomen  living  separate  from  men,  though 
receiving  their  visits  at  certain  seasons,  and  only  rearing  female 
children,  is  firmly  maintained  by  many  of  the  Acawoios  who 
profess  to  have  visited  the  distant  interior. 

La  Condamine  and  Father  Gili,  who  wrote  during  the  last 
century,  respectively  notice  them  under  the  somewhat  formidable 
titles  of  Coigniintesecouima  and  Aikeambenanos.  The  latter  speaks 
of  them  as  living  near  the  Cuchivero,  but  our  Indians,  when 
questioned  by'  ]\Ii'.  M'Clintock,  placed  them  farther  south,  and 
nearer  the  Parima  mountain  range  ;  others  have  fancied  that  they 
live  beyond  the  source  of  the  Corentyn.  Humboldt,  who  notices 
the  accounts  given  of  them,  thought  that  they  had  probably  some 
foundation  in  the  circumstance  of  Indian  women,  deprived  of  their 
male  protectors  by  the  fortune  of  war,  banding  together  for  mutual 
defence  and  assistance. 

Whatever  foundation  there  may  have  been  for  this  tale  of  the 
Amazons,  unlike  that  of  El  Dorado  it  still  exists,  and  may  long 
survive  among  the  Indian  tribes.  The  adventurous  knight-errant 
who  would  visit  their  supposed  locality,  to  explode  the  legend  or 
ascertain  on  what  foundation  it  has  rested,  would  have  to  pass 
through  the  land  of  the  blow-pipe  and  arrows  tipped  with  ourali, 
noiseless  but  deadly  weapons  in  the  hands  of  the  wdld  mountaineers, 
whom  Schomburgk,  in  his  adventurous  exploration,  had  to  make 
many  a  tedious  cu'cuit  to  avoid. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

THE      DEMERARA. 

The  Lower  District  of  that  Eiver — Places  of  Worship  of  various 
Denominations  —  Its  few  Indian  Inhabitants  —  The  Upper 
District — Aranipa — Malali — Visit  to  the  above — Incidents. 

Quitting  now  the  wild  and  purely  Indian  territory 
between  the  Essequibo  and  the  Orinoco,  we  will 
take  a  brief  glance  at  what  was  being  done,  or 
attempted,  nearer  the  civilized  districts  of  our 
province. 

The  Demerara  was,  in  point  of  time,  behind 
other  rivers  of  less  importance  as  the  scene  of 
special  efforts  for  the  conversion  of  its  aboriginal 
inhabitants. 

The  Indians  on  the  lower  portion  of  that  river, 
near  the  city,  had  become  few  in  number,  and  did 
not  occupy  so  important  a  position  comparatively  as 
tliose  in  districts  more  remote  from  civilization. 
Sugar  and  other  estates  were  formed  on  either  bank, 
extending  a  few  miles  from  Georgetown ;  and  for 
a  lonf>:  distance  above  them  the  diminishino-  native 
tribes,  who  until  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  cen- 
tury had  been  the  only  inhabitants,  were  necessarily 


THE  DEM  Eli  An  A.  283 

ovcrsliaclowcd  and  kept  in  the  background  Ly  tlic 
larfjer  and  ever  increasins;  number  of  settlers. 

The  provision  grounds  of  the  hitter — with  their 
cottages  nestling  among  the  large  and  bright  green 
leaves  of  the  bananas,  plantains,  and  other  tropical 
fruit-trees — are  very  numerous  and  picturesque; 
breaking  in  an  agreeable  manner  the  more  sombre 
character  of  the  wild  forest  scenery. 

Those  settlers  Avere  at  first  mostly  of  the  black  or 
coloured  races,  but  among  them  many  of  Portuguese 
and  Asiatic  origin  are  now  found.^  They  suj^port 
themselves  by  cultivating  provisions,  cutting  timber, 
shingles,  and  firewood,  and  by  making  charcoal.  The 
river  near  the  city  is  often  covered  with  theii'  craft 
of  various  sizes,  from  the  light  canoe  to  the  heavily- 
laden  punt,  bringing  down,  their  produce  to  a  ready 
market. 

In  the  division  of  that  county  into  parishes  by 
the  Legislature  (1826-7),  St.  Matthew's,  on  the  right 
bank,  was  allotted  to  the  Church  of  England,  and 
St.  Mark's,  on  the  left,  to  the  Church  of  Scotland. 
Beside  the  churches  and  chapels  belonging  to  those 
bodies,   other   places   of  worship  were  from  time  to 

^  Mr.  0  Tye  Kim,  wliose  zealous  labours  at  Singapore  in  the 
•conversion  of  his  countrymen  to  Christianity  were  honourably 
mentioned  in  the  Quarterly  Paper  of  the  S.P.G.  in  May  18G3, 
established,  amidst  many  difficulties,  the  first  settlement  of  Chinese 
at  Camuni  Creek  on  the  Demerara,  in  1865.  While  acting  with 
great  energy  in  temporal  matters,  as  the  head  and  director  of  the 
village,  he  preached  there  in  both  the  Amoy  and  Ilakka  dialects, 
and  with  assistant  catechists  itinerated  among  the  Chinese  immi- 
grants in  other  parts  of  the  colony. 


284  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

time  erected,  until  there  were  ten  or  twelve  of  various 
sizes  and  denominations  scattered  on  the  banks  of 
the  river,  in  what  for  convenience'  sake  we  may  here 
call  its  lower  district ;  i.e.  within  fifty  or  sixty  miles 
of  its  mouth.  At  some  of  these  Indian  worshippers 
might  be  found. 

The  district,  which  is  the  subject  of  this  brief 
sketch,  extends  above,  to  the  cataract  commonly  called 
the  Great  Falls  of  the  Demerara.  It  has  been,  in  the 
upper  portion  especially,  very  thinly  inhabited. 

A  station  was  founded,  at  a  place  called  Dalgin, 
by  the  exertions  of  three  successive  rectors  of 
St.  Matthew's— the  Kevs.  T.  Gill,  H.  H.  Jones,  and 
D.  Smith— who  from  time  to  time  paid  missionary 
\dsits  to  the  upper  portion  of  the  river.  They 
were  aided  by  religious  persons  among  the  settlers, 
one  of  whom,  a  respectable  black  man  named 
Alleyne,  offered  land,  collected  timber,  and  secured 
the  services  of  a  schoolmaster.  A  chapel  school 
was  at  length  built  there ;  Governor  (afterwards  Sir 
Philip)  Wodehouse  and  many  influential  inhabitants 
of  Georgetown  attending  the  consecration,  October 
7th,   1856. 

To  the  congregation  of  settlers  worshipping  there, 
the  neighbouring  Arawaks  by  degrees  joined  them- 
selves. Their  visits  to  the  Mahaicony  mission  (which 
during  those  years  had  been  steadily  progressing, 
through  the  labours  of  its  resident  teacher,  Mr.  Taylor, 
and  the  supervision  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  May,  and  others), 
contributed,  in  no  small  degree,  to  that  result.  Many 
of  the  Demerara  Arawaks  were  baptized  at  Dalgin, 


THE  DEMERARA.  285 

and  by  the  year  1865  about  thirty  of  that  race  were 
in  full  communion  there. 

The  traveller  proceeding  from  this  station  up  the 
river  would  soon  see  on  its  left  bank  the  fine  set- 
tlement of  Christianburg,  with  its  extensive  wood- 
cutting establishment  and  saw-mills.  The  Church 
of  Scotland  have  here  had  a  place  of  meeting  and 
a  school.  A  few  miles  farther  he  would  pass  the 
beautiful  bill  of  Akayma,  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
which  other  efforts  of  the  Enolish  Church  among  the 
Indians  have  been  made.  Passing  onward  he  would 
find  the  number  of  settlers  gradually  diminishing, 
and  the  aborigines  coming  more  prominently  into 
view.  Ere  reaching  Siba,  ''  the  Kock,"  a  boldly 
projecting  hill  of  granite,  which  commands  the  river, 
and  was  the  site  of  the  old  Indian  post,  one  or  two 
of  their  thatched  habitations  may  be  seen  from  the 
water,  peeping  through  the  trees  on  the  summit  of  an 
overhanging  hill,  while  their  canoes  are  observed 
gliding  near  the  bank,  or  passing  in  and  out  of  the 
smaller  streams.  Higher  up,  the  want  of  clothing 
and  generally  wild  appearance  of  the  redskins  show 
that  they  belong,  not  to  the  Arawak  race,  but  to 
that  of  the  Kapohn.  Mingled  with  the  latter  are 
individuals  of  the  Macusi,  Wapisiana,  and  other  tribes 
of  the  remote  interior,  who  have  come  from  the 
Brazilian  borders  to  labour  or  seek  protection  among 
the  settlers. 

The  large  punts,  deeply  laden  and  hung  round  with 
massive  timbers,  which  are  met  descending  the 
river  above  and  l3elow  the  rapids,  show  the  skill  and 


286  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

energy  of  anotlier  portion  of  the  inhabitants,  the 
hardy  woodcutters,  whose  operations  extend  to  the 
Great  Falls. 

The  higher  wants  of  this  mixed  population  of  wood- 
cutters and  Indians,  scattered  along  a  space  of  one 
hundred  miles,  were  for  a  long  period  unprovided 
for.  Here  and  there  a  settler  might  be  found,  who 
would  gather  his  j^eople  together  for  united  worship  ; 
but  little  else  was  (or  could  be)  done,  to  keep  alive  a 
sense  of  religion  among  them. 

At  length,  after  repeated  disappointments,  a  mission 
was  commenced  for  their  benefit,  which  was  placed 
for  a  short  time  under  the  Eev.  Mr.  Eastman.  He 
was  succeeded  by  the  Rev.  A.  S.  Tanner,  a  young 
clergyman,  who  entered  zealously  upon  the  missionary 
work  before  him.  With  a  small  boat,  and  a  crew  of 
four  Indian  lads,  he  moved  along  that  extensive 
tract,  holding  periodical  services  at  eight  stations, 
and  commencing  the  erection  of  a  chapel  above  the 
rapids,  on  the  picturesque  and  precipitous  hill  of 
Arampa.  About  Christmas  1856,  this  work  was 
suspended  for  lack  of  funds.  He  had  also  to  dismiss 
his  crew  from  the  same  cause,  and  was  then  compelled 
to  find  his  way  from  station  to  station  as  he  best 
could ;  sometimes  paddling,  with  a  little  boy  to  steer, 
in  a  small  wood-skin,  and  at  other  times  taking  a 
passage  in  a  passing  bateau.  The  cholera  then  visited 
the  colony,  and  the  dread  of  that  disease  caused  the 
Indians  to  hide  themselves,  and  avoid  the  missionary. 

The  work  was,  however,  pcrseveringly  carried  on, 
and    in    the  August  following   the  Bishop   found   the 


THE  DEMEBARA .  057 

building  crowded  with  worshippers.  More  than  one 
hundred  Indians  were  present  among  them. 

There  were,  however,  certain  inconveniences  attend- 
ing the  locality,  which  had  been,  perhaps,  too  hastily 
chosen,  and  a  better  situation  had  to  be  sought. 

About  midway  between  Dalgin  and  the  Falls  are 
the  rapids,  commonly  called  Malali,  from  an  Arawak 
word,  signifying  ^'swiftly  rushing"  (or  flowing) 
water.  The  Demerara  here  cuts  its  way  through  a 
densely-wooded  gorge  two  miles  in  length  ;  containing 
reefs  of  rocks  which  the  heavily-laden  punts  cannot 
pass,  except  when  the  river  is  swollen.  It  was  thought 
advisable  to  form  a  station  and  build  a  chapel  at  the 
foot  of  those  impediments  to  navigation ;  a  halting- 
place  for  most  persons  ascending  or  descending  the 
river. 

That  work  was  undertaken  and  successfully  accom- 
plished by  the  Eev.  G.  H.  Butt,  who,  after  an  interval, 
succeeded  Mr.  Tanner  in  the  charge  of  that  mission, 
and  erected  a  building  both  picturesque  and  of  good 
materials. 

I  accompanied  Archdeacon  Jones  in  visiting  that 
district,  in  May  1865.  Although  it  was  then  tem- 
porarily vacant,  and  only  served  by  monthly  visits 
of  the  clergy  of  Georgetown  and  its  neighbourhood, 
we  had  large  gatherings  of  respectable  settlers  and 
Indians.  Cornelius,  now  grown  old  and  feeble  in 
body,  and  Philip  Capui,  the  young  Acawoio  from 
Pomeroon,  went  with  us  on  this  occasion,  and  were 
of  great  service  among  their  respective  tribes. 

From  the  chapel  at  IMalali,  we  ascended  the  rapids. 


■^28^  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

and  went  on  to  tlie  abandoned  chapel  at  Arampa. 
Owing  to  the  late  heavy  rains,  we  were  about  eight 
hours  in  going  ten  miles.  This  caused  us,  on  our 
return,  to  be  overtaken  by  night  at  the  entrance  of 
the  rapids  ;  and  just  when  there  was  no  retreat,  a 
violent  thunderstorm,  which  had  been  for  hours 
gathering  around  the  summit  of  Tiger  Hill,  in  the 
neighbourhood,  suddenly  descended,  and  burst  over 
our  heads.  The  jDcals  reverberated  grandly  among 
the  precij)itous  rocks  from  side  to  side,  and  the  light- 
ning flashed  vividly  through  torrents  of  rain.  After 
each  blinding  flash  total  darkness  seemed  to  enclose  us, 
and  it  was  with  difficulty  our  swift  course  could  be 
guided  through  that  thickly-wooded  gorge  by  a  black 
boy,  whom  a  land  settler  had  lent  to  steer  us.  A 
slight  swerve  from  loss  of  nerve  on  his  part  might 
have  been  fatal.  A  double  flash,  fiercer  than  any  that 
had  preceded  it,  at  length  showed  us  with  ^dvid 
distinctness  the  mission  chapel,  our  desired  haven. 

As  we  descended  the  river,  two  days  after,  we  had 
another  proof  of  the  insecurity  of  human  life  among 
the  tribes  of  the  interior. 

Two  Indians  passed  us  in  a  very  light  canoe.  One 
was  unadorned  ;  but  the  man  who  steered  wore  a 
handsome  tiara  of  feathers,  and  had  his  skin  covered 
all  over  with  bright  red  spots,  like  those  of  a  jaguar, 
save  in  colour.  His  eyes  gleamed  wildly  through 
circles  of  the  same  paint ;  and  both  himself  and  his 
companion  were  paddling  with  all  their  might  against 
the  stream.^ 

^  One  of  our  Indians  recognised  that  spotted  man  as  one  whom 


THE  DEMERAEA.  289 

We  soon  after  readied  Siba,  and  landed  to  visit  tlie 
hospitable  family  residing  there,  and  to  speak  to  some 
Indians  from  the  interior  in  their  employ.  The  latter  we 
could  not  then  find ;  but,  as  we  were  re-embarking,  a 
strange  Indian  came  over  the  steep  rock,  and  descended 
hastily  to  the  water-side.  He  was  a  man  of  singidar 
and  somewhat  grotesque  appearance,  having  both  arms 
and  thighs  scarified  in  parallel  downward  lines,  which 
were  cross-barred  with  streaks  of  blue  paint ;  the 
former  being  considered  by  his  tribe  a  remedy  against 
rheumatic  pains,  and  the  latter  very  ornamental.  He 
was  excited — pointed  up  the  river,  and  finding  that 
Philip  understood  his  language,  told  us  that  "the 
painted  man,  w^ho  had  so  hurriedly  passed  us,  had 
assassinated  another  Indian  the  day  before,  and 
w^as  then  flying  back  to  the  distant  interior."  The 
remote  mountain  tribes  of  the  south-west  had  been 
for  some  time  at  war,  as  we  had  already  heard, 
and  many  Arecunas  and  others  had  come  among 
our  settlements  to  avoid  the  strife.  Safety  is,  how- 
ever, in  such  cases,  difficult  to  obtain.  When  an 
Indian  has  once  devoted  himself  to  accomplish  the 
death  of  another,  he  will  follow  him  any  distance, 
and  undergo  any  privation,  to  fulfil  his  deadly 
purpose. 

The    Indians   of    the    Essequibo,    and     from    the 

he  had  seen  watching  a  group  of  Indians  from  the  corner  of  a 
street  in  Georgetown,  ten  days  hefore.  He  had  not  then  assumed 
his  paint.  He  probably  tracked  his  intended  victim  from  the 
remote  interior  to  the  city,  and  afterwards  back  to  the  forest, 
where  he  accomplished  liis  deadly  purpose  of  Kanalvni. 

U 


290  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

tributaries  of  that  river,  in  tlieir  journeys  to  and 
from  that  part  of  the  Demerara,  avail  themselves 
of  the  path  by  which  Waterton  crossed,  at  a  place 
called  Coomaparo,  a  few  miles  below  the  falls.^ 

Those  falls  we  had  not  time  to  visit  on  that 
occasion.  The  Bishop,  however,  had  seen  them  in 
1851,  and  noticed  them  in  his  published  journal. 

The  following  circumstance,  then  witnessed  by 
the  Bishop,  exhibits  one  of  the  most  pleasing  traits 
in  the  Indian  character.  The  reader  may  place  it 
in  contrast  with  the  dark  incident  which,  on  the 
same  river,  came  under   our  notice. 

1  Eetween  the  Demerara  Falls  and  the  Essequiho  is  a  re- 
markable rock,  which  few  save  Indians  have  hitherto  seen.  The 
name  of  that  rock  is  Maboora ;  it  is  the  uppermost  of  a  suc- 
cession of  huge  natural  terraces.  The  ascent  to  the  summit  from 
the  level  forest  below  occupies  some  hours. 

The  rock  itself  is  almost  perpendicular.  Its  face  is  worn  with 
the  streams  which  have  run  down  it  during  the  heavy  tropical 
rains  of  many  ages,  and  broken  up  into  huge  boulders.  Its  top 
is  level  and  of  considerable  extent.  From  the  west  end  there  is 
a  line  view  over  an  immense  tract  of  country,  with  the  broad 
Essequibo  flowing  through  it  and  partly  hidden  by  a  range  of  hills. 
The  forest  at  the  base  of  the  terraces  appears  from  that  height  like 
a  well-stocked  cabbage  garden. 

In  the  western  base  of  the  rock  is  a  large  cave,  which  has  an 
inner  chamber  with  a  narrow  entrance.  The  cave  is  reached  by 
another  path  than  that  which  leads  to  the  summit,  and  the  dis- 
tance is  too  great  for  both  to  be  visited  on  the  same  day. 

The  cock  of  the  rock,  beautiful  in  the  golden-orange  tints  of 
his  plumage,  and  his  double  fan-like  crest,  has  made  that  cavern 
his  abode.  The  nests  of  those  brilliant  birds  are  at  some  distance 
from  the  sandy  floor,  attached  to  the  rocky  sides. 

Mr.  C.  Bispham,  lay  reader  at  ISIalali  station  after  our  visit, 
made  a  journey  to  Maboora,  and  from  his  description  the  above 
account  is  taken. 


THE  DEMERARA.  291 

"  In  ap23roacliing  the  falls  we  halted  at  an  Indian 
settlement  on  the  left  bank,  and  here  we  saw  a 
young  jaguar.  It  was  a  few  weeks  old,  and  ex- 
tremely savage  when  any  of  us  went  near  it.  But 
never  did  I  observe  such  apparent  gentleness  and 
attachment  in  any  animal  as  when,  after  one  or 
two  of  our  party  had  certainly  not  gone  the  way 
to  win  the  little  creature's  affections,  it  allowed 
itself  to  be  drawn  close  to  us  by  an  Indian  woman, 
and  afterwards  by  a  little  child.  Not  a  moment 
before  it  was  as  angry  and  savage  as  could  be ; 
but  no  sooner  did  the  child  draw  it  towards  her, 
than,  looking  up  with  an  expression  of  intelligence 
and  trustfulness  c[uite  new  to  me,  it  nestled  itself 
within  the  embrace  of  its  kind  protectress.  The 
Indians  are  proverbially  famed  for  the  f^icility  with 
which  they  attract  animals  towards  them." 

May  an  influence  like  that  obtained  over  the 
young  jaguar  by  the  little  Indian  maid  be  exerted 
by  the  mildly-subduing  power  of  Christianity  over 
her  wild  heathen  countrymen,  who,  in  devoting 
themselves,  like  the  spotted  man  we  saw,  to 
"Kanaima"  murder,  have  avowedly  taken  the  jaguar^ 
as  their  pattern.  May  the  Saviour's  example  and 
meek  doctrines  of  mercy  and  forgiveness  soften  their 
hearts  until,  in  the  words  of  the  Holy  Scripture: 
"A  little   child  shall  lead  them." 

^  See  Chap.  x. 


u  2 


CHAPTER  VII. 

BERBICE   AND    EASTERN   GUIANA. 

The  old  Dutch  Colony  on  the  Berbice  gradually  abandoned  for  the 
Coast  Lands — Scene  of  the  Moravian  Labours — Efforts  to 
Christianize  the  Indians  during  the  j)resent  Century — Mis- 
sionary Expedition  to  the  Acawoios  near  the  Cataracts,  1866 — 
Incidents — Open  and  healthy  Savannahs  which  border  the 
Berbice. 

The  Corentyn — Indian  District — Indian  Slave-trade — Eeport  on 
the  various  Tribes  on  that  Eiver,  1866 — Orealla. 

Indian  Tribes  of  Dutch  and  Erench  Guiana. 

About  sixty  miles  to  tlie  eastward  of  Georgetown, 
the  Berbice,  a  larger  river  than  the  Demerara,  flows 
into  the  Atlantic.  In  the  early  part  of  the  seven- 
teenth century  its  banks  became  the  seat  of  a 
flourishing  colony,  which  was  established  about  twenty 
years  after  that  on  the  Essequibo,  and  more  than 
a  century  before  the  settlements  on  the  Demerara 
became  important. 

The  latter  river,  having  a  more  central  position, 
and  an  entrance-channel  of  greater  depth,  has  now- 
become  the  chief  port  of  the  united  province.  The 
more  shallow  entrance  of  the  Berbice,  however,  thouo-h 
a  great  disadvantage  of  late,  could  have  ofi'ered  little 
impediment  to  the  Dutch   navigators  of  those  days, 


THE  BERBICE.  293 

whose  flat-bottomed  ships  were  of  far  less  tonnage 
than  many  which  now  visit  the  colony. 

Where  the  neat  and  quiet  town  of  New  Amsterdam 
now  stands,  and  where  cultivation  and  cattle-farms 
are  seen  stretching  eastward  and  westward  along  the 
line  of  coast,  there  was  then  an  unbroken  tract  of 
marshy  forest.  The  old  Dutch  maps  show  that  that 
woody  wilderness  extended  up  the  river  nearly  to 
Fort  Nassau,  about  forty-five  miles  from  its  mouth. 
From  that  spot,  then  the  seat  of  government,  plan- 
tation succeeded  plantation  for  many  miles — there 
being  more  than  one  hundred  on  the  Berbice,  and 
a  considerable  number  high  up  its  tributary,  the 
Canje.  On  those  estates  coffee,  sugar,  and  other 
tropical  productions  were  grown. 

In  those  lawless  times,  when  the  West  Indian  seas 
were  overrun  by  buccaneers,  whose  piratical  descents 
rendered  it  dangerous  to  cultivate  the  rich  alluvial 
lands  of  the  coast,  the  colonists  were  confined  to  the 
rivers,  whose  channels  could  be,  by  means  of  forts, 
defended  with  comparative  ease.  Among  all  the  fine 
streams  which  water  the  land  there  is  none  equal  to 
the  Berbice  for  the  purposes  of  colonization.  The 
banks  are,  with  few  interruptions,  of  moderate  and 
equal  height ;  and  the  rapids  and  cataracts,' — pictu- 
resque but  fatal  obstacles  to  navigation, —  are  situated 
much  higher  up  than  in  any  other  of  our  rivers,  there 
being  none  within  160  miles  of  its  mouth. 

Moreover,  while  the  many  windings  of  the  river 
gave  ample  frontage  to  the  estates  for  drainage  and 
water    communication,    the   vast    open   savannahs,   a 


294  THE  INDIAN  TBIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

peculiar  feature  of  Berbice,  allowed  of  easy  land- 
communication  in  their  rear.  The  colonists  could 
ride  by  short  cuts  from  place  to  place,  and  paths 
were  made  across  the  "downs;"  which,  connecting 
post  with  post,  were  valuable  for  military  purposes, 
as  w^ell  as  for  those  of  business  and  pleasure. 

From  the  settlement  of  those  plantations  till  near 
the  end  of  the  last  century,  that  part  of  the  Berbice 
must  have  presented  a  lively  scene.  Light  and  gaily- 
painted  tent-boats,  with  punts  and  hea\y  craft,  were 
moving  on  its  waters,  while  sounds  of  labour,  ox  of 
evening  merriment,  not  unmixed,  however,  at  times 
with  different  and  less  pleasant  cries,  arose  from  the 
plantations  wdiich  studded  its  banks. 

But  at  length  the  coast  lands  and  the  lower  parts 
of  the  rivers  began  to  be  cultivated.  The  seat 
of  government  was  transferred  to  the  present  New 
Amsterdam,  and  that  once  prosperous  district  became 
gradually  deserted.  Nature  resumed  her  sway,  and 
tall  forests  once  more  stand  where  the  garden-like 
Dutch  plantations  flourished. 

The  old  colony  of  Berbice  has  a  history  of  con- 
siderable interest,  for  its  vicissitudes  were  great. 
Accounts  of  the  early  invasions  of  the  French,  &c., 
and  of  the  terrible  insurrection  of  1763,  are  of  course 
to  be  found  in  the  works  of  Dutch  authors  :  and  many 
incidents  connected  with  them  may  still  be  heard 
from  the  lips  of  the  descendants  of  the  old  colonists, 
though  most  of  those  traditions  will  expire  with  the 
present  generation. 

From  the  accounts,  both  written  and  oral,  which 


THE  BERBICE.  295 

liave  come  down  to  us,  it  appears  that  religion  was 
at  a  very  low  ebb  among  the  community  at  large. 
No  effectual  efforts  were  made  to  impart  Christianity, 
either  to  their  slaves  or  to  the  Indians  in  the  forests 
around.  The  Mora\dans  alone,  in  this  respect,  seem 
to  have  striven  to  fulfil  the  Divine  command. 

In  the  First  Part  of  this  work  we  have  given  a 
brief  sketch  of  the  Moravian  Mission  in  Berbice.  It 
lasted  only  a  quarter  of  a  century,  and  was  destroyed 
in  1763. 

A  long  period  of  neglect  ensued.  Even  after  the 
work  among  the  Indians  had  been  begun  by  our 
Church  missionaries  on  the  Essequibo  in  1829,  several 
years  elapsed  ere  any  efforts  were  made  for  the 
conversion  of  those  on  the  Berbice. 

About  the  year  1842,  a  Mr.  Meyers  (who  was,  I 
believe,  of  German  extraction),  having  previously 
visited  the  Pomeroon,  and  found  that  important 
Indian  district  pre-occupied,  undertook  the  oflice  of 
teacher  on  the  Berbice.  For  a  few  years  he  laboured 
with  much  zeal,  travelling  from  place  to  place  by 
land  as  well  as  by  water.  On  one  occasion,  having 
rashly  dismissed  a  guide  whom  a  settler  had  charged 
to  convey  him  safely  to  an  Indian  settlement,  he  lost 
his  way  on  the  great  Manacaburi  savannah.  He 
had  his  hammock  with  him,  and  fortunately  found 
some  ripe  wild  fruits,  on  which  he  managed  to  sus- 
tain life,  but  the  danger  to  which  he  was  exposed 
from  wild  beasts  and  reptiles  was  very  great.  After 
wandering  for  some  days,  and  being  exhausted  with 
fatioiie,  anxiety,  and  privation,  the  unfortunate  man 


296  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GVIANA. 

was  at  length  found,  and  rescued  from  impending 
death  by  some  Arawaks  near  the  Abari.  He  died 
some  years  after  at  Coomacka,  where  he  had  col- 
lected some  Indians  around  him.  They  dispersed 
after  his  death,  and  our  Bishop,  when  in  1851 
he  ascended  the  river  as  far  as  that  spot,  found  few 
remaining. 

On  that  occasion  the  settlers  petitioned  that  a 
clergyman  might  be  sent  to  labour  among  them. 
The  Rev.  J.  M'Clelland  was  first  appointed.  He 
was  succeeded  by  the  Revs.  T.  Farrer,  R.  Hillis, 
and  L.  M'Kenzie,  each  for  a  short  period.  In  1858 
the  Rev.  M,  B.  Johnson  was  placed  in  charge  of  the 
district,  and  remained  there  nearly  seven  years. 
During  that  period  a  chapel  was  built  near  the  Hitia 
savannah.  A  malignant  sore,  supposed  to  have  been 
first  occasioned  by  the  poisonous  bite  of  a  fly  between 
the  eyes,  compelled  him  at  length  to  relinquish  his 
post,  and  after  great  and  protracted  sufiering,  endured 
with  much  patience,  his  weary  spirit  sought  its  rest. 

It  being  desirable,  for  missionary  purposes,  to  ex- 
plore the  whole  river  as  far  as  it  is  iiihabited,  and 
ascertain  by  personal  inspection  the  tribes,  numbers, 
and  condition  of  its  entire  Indian  population,  an 
expedition  was  resolved  on  for  that  purpose.  The 
Bishop  decided  to  go  in  person,  and  to  take  with 
him  the  Rev.  Mr.  Wyatt  and  myself.  As  there  were 
said  to  be  Acawoios  living  very  high  up  the  river, 
I  sent  for  Philip  Capui  from  the  Pomeroon,  hoping 
that  he  might  be  of  service  among  his  heathen 
brethren. 


THE  BEBBICE.  297 

We  left  New  Amsterdam  April  IStli,  1866,  in  two 
boats;  om-  party  being  large,  and  having  to  carry 
provisions  for  many  days.  That  evening  we  reached 
Mara,  the  highest  point  of  sugar  cultivation. 

We  left  the  manager's  hospitable  roof  about  mid- 
night, and  at  daybreak  reached  the  first  savannahs, 
called  Bartika  Downs,  and  swung  our  hammocks 
under  some  trees  in  an  old  cattle-pen.  In  the  after- 
noon we  passed  the  site  of  Fort  Nassau  and  the  Old 
Town  (relics  of  which  may  still  be  found  among  the 
over-growing  bush),  and  came  a  little  before  sunset 
to  some  sand-hills,  from  the  back  of  which  the  Hitia 
savannah  stretches  towards  the  Mahaicony.  Here  we 
saw  the  little  mission-chapel,  standing  on  the  summit 
of  a  steep  and  picturesque  hill. 

The  next  day  was  Sunday,  and  our  service  was 
attended  not  only  by  the  settlers,  but  also  by  the 
Arawaks  from  Hitia  and  Manacaburi.  It  was  cheer- 
ing to  see  every  race  on  the  banks  of  the  river  joining 
in  the  various  services,  and  represented  at  the  Holy 
Eucharist,  though  the  numbers  were  not  large.  The 
Araw4ks,  having  been  catechized  after  service,  ex- 
pressed their  desire  for  further  instruction,  and 
intention  of  meeting  us  on  our  return. 

At  nightfall  we  resumed  our  course,  resting  during 
the  next  ebb-tide  at  the  settlement  of  a  Mr.  Hartmann, 
near  the  Wieroni. 

There  was  a  small  community  of  Arawaks  a  little 
distance  up  that  stream,  and  Mr.  Wyatt  took  me  at 
daybreak  in  the  smaller  boat  to  visit  them. 

On  landing  we  saw  several  neat  cottages,  but  only 


298  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

two  women  were  visible.  They,  according  to  Indian 
ideas  of  propriety,  declined  to  converse  with  strangers 
of  the  opposite  sex.  A  few  kind  words,  however,  and 
the  title  of  mother  in  her  own  language,  overcame 
the  reserve  of  the  elder  woman,  who  immediately 
became  copious  and  voluble  in  her  communications. 
She  told  us  that  the  men  were  in  another  part  of 
the  village,  and  led  us  through  a  shady  grove  to 
see  them. 

They  were  few  in  number,  shy  at  first,  and  un- 
willing to  converse,  but  in  a  little  time  that  feeling 
wore  off.  They  then  told  us  of  their  position — that 
they  were  Christians,  with  no  resident  teacher,  and 
that  a  Mr.  Avelyn,  from  the  Demerara,  had  been 
formerly  accustomed  to  visit  them.  Their  place  of 
meeting  was  well  suited  to  their  circumstances,  and 
to  the  climate ;  being  a  large  room,  open  at  the  sides 
and  at  one  end.  They  had  paved  it  with  old  Dutch 
bricks,  which  may  be  obtained  in  great  quantities  on 
the  sites  of  the  abandoned  plantations. 

Most  of  the  party  were  dressed  in  EurojDcan  cloth- 
ing. The  nearest  approach  to  their  natural  habits 
which  we  saw  was  in  a  young  woman,  who  carried 
about  with  her  a  little  black  monkey.  The  poor 
animal,  which  had  lost  one  eye  by  a  shot,  w^as  borne, 
according  to  their  custom,  on  her  head,  with  its  paws 
tightly  grasping  her  glossy  hair. 

They  all  accompanied  us  to  the  water-side,  partly 
to  say  farewell,  and  partly  to  see  Philip,  of  ^^hom 
we  had  told  them,  evidently  regarding  an  Acaivoio 
Christian  who   could   read    and    teach    as   something 


THE  BEBBICE.  299 

very  marvellous.  Tlicy  were  probably  not  a  little 
disappointed  at  finding  liim  unpaiutcd, — with  no  sticks 
tlirongli  liis  ears  and  nose, — and  in  dress  and  appear- 
ance mucli  like  one  of  themselves. 

Not  far  from  that  place  we  reached  a  district  where 
settlers  were  rather  numerous.  There  the  London  mis- 
sionaries had  built  a  chapel  five  or  six  years  before 
on  the  left  bank  of  the  river. 

At  leng-th  we  reached  Coomacka.  A  range  of  richly- 
wooded  high  land  here  forms  the  western  bank, 
behind  which  the  open  downs  stretch  for  many  miles 
towards  the  Demerara. 

We  found  quarters  at  the  settlement  of  an  intelli- 
gent Arawak  named  Jeremiah.  His  house  was  neat 
and  spacious  ;  and  it  was  gratifying  to  see  that,  in 
order  to  accommodate  his  Indian  brethren  and  the 
settlers  who  were  in  the  habit  of  there  meeting  the 
clergyman  for  Divine  service,  he  had  fitted  up  one 
half  with  benches.  These  were  made,  not  of  boards, 
which  he  could  not  afford,  but  of  straight  sticks,  laid 
close  together  and  secured  on  uprights.  Eain  fell  so 
heavily  this  day  that  we  saw  only  a  few  Indians. 
A  little  girl  present  had  on  her  head  a  small  black 
monkey,  like  the  one  we  had  seen  before,  save  that 
this  had  both  eyes. 

The  forest  around,  and  for  some  miles  above,  was 
full  of  the  relics  of  former  cultivation.  Bricks  in 
great  numbers  showed  where  the  buildings  of  the 
old  estates  had  stood.  At  a  very  wild-looking  place, 
where  we  chanced  to  land  to  rest  our  crews,  the 
well-marked  beds  and  drains,   over  whieli  tall  trees 


300  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  QUIANA. 

were  growing,  showed  that  civilized  man  had  once 
"  replenished  and  subdued "  that  part  of  the  earth. 
It  was  rather  saddening  to  see  those  signs  of  aban- 
donment, where  man  had  once  planted  his  foot  and 
made  his  mark  so  firmly,  though  we  knew  that  the 
former  cultivators  had  not  been  driven  off,  but  had 
migrated  by  degrees  to  a  richer  soil. 

In  the  course  of  the  next  day  we  left  those  relics 
of  civilization  far  behind,  and  among  them  the  site  of 
the  old  Moravian  mission,  destroyed  103  years  before. 
There  were  no  more  settlements.  We  had  to  find  a 
little  "  bawn^boho "  (or  shed)  to  sleep  under — tie  our 
hammocks  between  the  trees,  or  lie  upon  the  narrow 
benches  of  our  boats,  as  the  case  might  be. 

Our  fifth  and  sixth  days'  voyage  was  through  the 
same  dense  forest,  in  which  were  the  scattered  dwell- 
ings of  a  very  few  Arawaks.  Our  chief  object  being 
to  reach  and  open  communication  with  the  Acawoios, 
we  pushed  on. 

Having  been  told  by  the  settlers  below  that  we 
should  find  Acawoios  near  a  small  stream  called 
Mombaca,  it  was  arranged  that  Mr.  Wyatt  and  myself 
should  go  on  before  in  the  smaller  boat,  with  Philip, 
to  visit  them.  We  had  been  told  that  we  should 
have  to  leave  our  boat  at  the  mouth  of  the  stream, 
whence  a  path  would  lead  us  direct  to  the  settlement. 
Instead  of  this,  we  found  neither  landing-place  nor 
path  until  we  had  been  nearly  an  hour  cutting  and 
forcing  our  way  up  the  obstructed  stream.  Philip 
and  Jeremiah  then  took  their  guns  and  went  with 
me    to    the    settlement.      It   was    about    two    miles 


THE  BEBBICE.  301 

distant,  situated  on  a  pleasant  lawn-like  plain,  fringed 
with  woodland,  which  admitted  here  and  there  a  view 
of  the  distant  savannah.  In  this  charming  spot,  which 
was  kept  very  clean,  were  six  or  seven  houses,  and 
as  many  dogs.  The  latter  rushed  at  us,  barking 
fiercely,  but  no  human  being  was  visible,  and  no 
voice  answered  our  hail.  At  last  we  found  an  old 
woman  who  had  shut  herself  in  an  enclosed  house, 
and  pretended  to  be  busy  sifting  cassava  meal.  She 
would  neither  look  at  us,  nor  reply  to  Philip's  civil 
salutation  and  questions.  At  length,  finding  us  im- 
portunate, she  said,  sharply,  in  Arawak,  "  No  Aca- 
woios  live  here."  Being  asked  where  the  Arawak 
men  of  the  settlement  then  were,  she  said,  "  Absent," — ■ 
which  was  indeed  sufficiently  evident.  We  then  asked 
where  we  should  find  the  Acawoios,  and  she  replied, 
"  At  Coroduni."  We  then  ventured  to  inquire  where 
that  place  was  situated,  and  were  told,  "  At  the  head 
of  the  river."  As  no  traveller  had  yet  reached  the 
head  of  the  Berbice,  this  information  was  rather 
vague  and  indefinite,  but  it  was  all  we  could  get 
from  her.  She  spoke  with  laconic  severity,  as  if  she 
knew  that  we  were  after  no  good,  or  our  ignorance  of 
the  locality  were  something  c|uite  inexcusable  and 
personally  ofiensive.  We  therefore  took  our  leave, 
after  trying  to  explain  the  object  of  our  visit,  which 
she  heard  with  a  sort  of  grunt,  betokening  indif- 
ference. 

There  was  no  reason  to  doubt  the  truth  of  the  poor 
old  woman's  statement,  though  contrary  to  the  infor- 
mation we  had  received.     Her  village  seems  to  have 


302  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

been  a  frontier-post  between  tlie  nations.  Mombaca, 
who  bad  lived  there  some  years  before,  was  of  mixed 
Arawak  and  Acawoio  race,  and  acted  as  a  sort  of 
consul  for  both.  He  seems  to  have  been  a  man  of 
some  consequence,  attentive  to  his  personal  dignity 
and  Indian  etiquette  in  general.  A  gentleman  of 
New  Amsterdam  told  me  that  he  one  day  found 
him  entertaining  a  party  of  Acawoios — distinguished 
visitors,  it  seemed,  from  the  interior.  He  was,  of 
course,  in  full  costume  as  an  Indian  chief,  and 
decorated  for  the  occasion.  One  of  his  legs  he  had 
painted  red,  and  the  other  black, — a  tasteful  variety 
which  might  have  been  assumed  as  significant  of 
the  two  races  to  which  he  belonged,  and  the  just 
and  equal  manner  in  which  his  affection  and  duty 
were  divided  between  them. 

Having  extricated  our  boat  from  that  obstructed 
stream,  we  pushed  on  to  communicate  to  the  Bishop 
the  scanty  information  we  had  acquired.  But  it 
happened  that  the  other  boat,  some  miles  ahead,  was 
pushing  on  at  equal  speed  in  the  hope  of  overtaking 
us.  Our  little  craft  not  having  been  visible  at  the 
mouth  of  the  Mombaca,  they  concluded  that  we 
had  already  gone  on. 

Passing  a  high  and  precipitous  hill  of  white  sand, 
rising  direct  from  the  water,  and  affording  from  its 
summit  one  of  the  finest  views  of  woodland  imagin- 
able, we  arrived  at  a  place  where  the  river  divides, 
forming  Yowanna  Island.  Up  one  side  of  this  we 
went,  and  should  have  descended  the  other  to  search 
for  the  Bishop's  boat  ;  had  not  Jeremiah,  who  in  his 


TEE  BERBICE.  303 

little  canoe  liovercd  about  us  with  guardian  care, 
proceeded  quietly  up  the  other  channel,  and  meeting 
us  above,  told  us  that  it  was  not  there. 

Some  miles  higher,  after  a  glorious  sunset,  the 
shades  of  evening  overtook  us  on  the  still  river,  AVe 
had  reached  a  place  where  it  seemed  to  divide  again, 
and  we  knew  not  which  course  to  take.  We  feared 
also  that  the  Bishop  might  not  have  come  on  so  far. 
Therefore  we  landed,  our  prospect  for  the  night  being 
rather  a  poor  one.  The  stores  and  luggage  were  in 
the  larger  boat.  AVe  had  no  hammocks,  nor  any  food, 
save  one  small  tin  of  preserved  meat.  One  of  our 
black  rowers,  however,  had  a  few  plantains,  which 
were  shared  among  all.  Large  fires  were  made  on 
the  shore ;  the  night  was  dry,  and  after  prayers  we 
lay  down  on  the  benches  of  the  boat.  The  landing- 
place  seemed  a  charming  spot  to  bathe  in,  but  there 
was  a  strange  commotion,  with  gleaming  flashes,  in 
the  water,  occasioned,  we  found,  by  the  movements 
of  the  bloodthirsty  little  fishes  called  pirai,  of  which 
we  had  never  seen  such  a  multitude  together.  They 
attacked  with  their  formidable  jaws  and  ravenous 
ferocity  everything  that  fell  overboard.^ 

^  "  Serrasalmo  niger"  {Caribi  '^  Pirai"  Arawak  '■^  HumcC). 
Schombnrgk,  who  attentively^  observed  the  habits  of  these 
voracious  creatures,  says  that  they  will  attack  and  devour  fisli 
of  ten  times  their  own  weight,  beginning  at  the  caudal  fin,  and 
so  disabling  their  victim.  On  the  Corentyn  he  fell  in  with  a  largo 
lugunani  (or  sun-fish)  surrounded  by  pirais.  They  had  'devoured 
it  piecemeal  to  within  its  pectoral  fins,  yet  it  was  still  alive.  There 
is  scarcely  any  animal  that  they  will  not  attack — man  certainly  is 
not  excepted,  "  Large  alligators,  which  have  been  wounded  on  the 
tail,  afford  them  a  fine  chance  of  satisfying  their  hunger." 


304  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

Our  kind  Arawak,  tliough  tired,  and  unacquainted 
with  the  river  so  high  up,  went  on,  and  fortunately 
taking  the  right  channel,  found  the  Bishop  encamped 
about  two  hours'  paddle  farther  on,  and  very  anxious 
about  us.  He  returned  the  same  night  with  the 
welcome  news,  and  after  telling  PhiUp  which  course 
to  steer,  departed  homewards  to  his  family.  His 
companionship  had  been  providential.  But  for  him 
both  parties  (one  entirely  without  food)  would  have 
descended  the  river  some  distance  next  day  to  search 
for  each  other,  and  by  keeping  the  same  distance 
apart,  or  taking  different  channels,  might  have  failed 
in  meeting  again. 

The  loss  of  even  a  few  hours  would,  as  we  after- 
wards found,  have  prevented  our  reaching  the  Aca- 
woios ;  while,  as  it  fortunately  happened,  our  forced 
progress  alone  enabled  us  to  accomplish  that — the 
main  object  of  our  voyage. 

Early  the  next  morning  we  reached  the  Bishop's 
encampment,  to  the  satisfaction  of  all.  On  landing, 
I  observed  the  deep  track  of  a  tapir  or  maipuri  in  the 
soft  forest  earth  immediately  behind  it.  Large  drops 
of  blood  on  the  fallen  leaves  showed  that  it  had  been 
wounded.  A  jaguar  or  some  other  savage  animal  had 
probably  sprung  on  it  during  the  night,  and  been 
dislodged  by  the  tapir's  dashing  against  a  tree,  or 
taking    to     the    river.      Whatever    the    cause,    the 

The  sun-fish  mentioned  above  is  so  named  from  a  golden  circle 
on  the  tail,  and  differs  much  in  shape  and  size  from  the  clumsy- 
looking  sea-lish  commonly  known  by  that  name. 


THE  BERBICE.  305 

fresbness  of  the  blood  and  the  state  of  the  track 
showed  that  the  bleeding  animal  had  passed  only 
a  few  hours  before. 

A  short  pull  brought  us  into  the  IMapa  Lake,  a 
small  sheet  of  water  with  high  land  on  one  side, 
which  we  ascended  for  a  few*  minutes  to  enjoy  the 
view.  We  found  some  difficulty  in  getting  out  of 
this  lake,  there  being  several  apparent  openings 
which  resemble  the  river.  Three  of  these  we 
entered  in  succession  before  we  found  the  right  one. 
Those  false  openings,  w^hich  probably  show  its  former 
channels,  are  a  peculiar  feature  of  that  part  of  the 
Berbice. 

That  day  we  passed  an  encampment,  with  ham- 
mocks slung  to  trees,  and  wood-skin  canoes  and 
captive  turtles  tied  at  the  water  side.  The  people, 
who  were  probably  the  Arawaks  from  Mombaca,  were 
not  visible.  They  were  catching  fish  by  poisoning  a 
stream  in  the  neighbourhood,  as  we  judged  from  the 
haiarri  roots  left  in  the  camp. 

Our  row^ers  now  had  heavy  work.  The  tide,  which 
ascends  in  the  Berbice  higher  than  in  any  other  of 
our  rivers,  no  longer  checked  the  current,  which, 
narrowed  by  sandbanks,  ran  suongly  against  us. 
Those  banks,  where  they  rise  above  the  water,  are 
frequented  by  guanas,  which  bask  luxuriously  in  the 
sun  and  lay  their  eggs  there.  A  few  shrubs  grow  on 
them,  and  in  ^ne  spot  wild  vines  intertwining  had 
formed  a  fairy  bower,  surmounted  by  the  slender 
stem  and  feathery  crown  of  a  small  palm  which 
supported  it ; — the  light  green  of  the    whole    being 

X 


306  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

beautifully  relieved  by  the  dark  foliage  of  the  forest 
behind. 

As  we  bivouacked  the  night  following  among  the 
trees  on  the  river's  bank,  we  were  getting  very  anxious 
as  to  the  success  of  our  expedition.  Having  engage- 
ments for  service  down  the  river,  it  was  an  imperative 
duty  to  commence  our  return  the  next  day.  Of  the 
people  we  sought  we  could  see  and  hear  nothing, 
though  we  had  expected  to  meet  them  long  before. 

Very  early  the  next  morning  we  proceeded,  still 
windiiio;  onward  throuo^h  an  interminable  and  unin- 
habited  forest.  For  the  last  forty-two  hours  we  had 
not  met  a  human  being — but  we  knew  that  the 
cataracts  of  the  Berbice  could  not  now  be  far  off,  and 
that  the  Acawoios  lived  below  them,  and  therefore 
resolved  to  push  on  for  three  hours  longer  before 
giving  up  the  effort  to  find  them. 

Ere  we  had  sufficient  daylight  clearly  to  discern 
our  course,  both  boats  struck  sharply  on  the  rocky 
bed  of  a  rapid.  Finding  a  channel  to  the  left  we 
went  on.  Our  prospect  of  success  was  rapidly 
diminishing  as  minutes  and  half-hours  flew  past, 
when  on  rounding  a  point  we  came  suddenly  in 
view  of  a  newly-cleared  Indian  settlement,  which 
was  greeted  with  a  shout  of  joy  from  our  weary 
crews.  Very  pleasant  it  Avas  to  see  it  peeping  from 
the  tall  forest  on  the  river's  bank,  with  several  small 
islands  in  front ; — while  the  higher  region,  from  which 
the  river  descends  by  many  falls,  was  rendered  visible 
by  the  rising  sun,  above  the  morning  mist  which  still 
hung  over  the  intervening  forest. 


THE  BERBICE.  307 

The  settlement  was  Coroduni,  and  we  found  there 
the  few  Aeawoios  we  had  come  so  far  to  seek.  The 
men  present  were  handsome  and  Avell-shaped,  wore 
small  moiistachios,  unusual  with  Indians,  and  were 
not  disfigured  by  uncouth  ornaments.  The  chief, 
Simon,  who  was  the  finest  man  at  the  settlement, 
came  down  the  trunk  of  one  of  the  felled  trees,  and, 
after  a  short  parley  with  Philip,  piloted  us  to  the 
landing-place.  We  found  there  two  or  three  settlers, 
wdio  had  come  that  great  distance  to  procure  and  salt 
fish.  All  were  invited  to  join  us  in  morning  prayers, 
after  which  Philip  and  myself  sat  down  on  the  timber 
to  confer  with  the  Indians  in  their  native  manner, 
while  the  rest  of  our  party,  that  they  might  not 
distract  attention,  proceeded  onward  some  distance 
up  the  river. 

It  was  a  gTcat  satisfaction  to  find  that  the  dialect  of 
the  western  Aeawoios  spoken  by  Philip  did  not  diifer 
materially  from  that  of  this  most  eastern  clan.  The 
words  of  the  Creed,  &c.,  were  well  understood,  though 
they  had  never  heard  them  before.  We  gave  each  a 
copy,  knowing  by  experience  that,  though  they  could 
not  read,  the  Scripture  illustrations  Avould  interest 
them,  and  the  explanation  we  gave  of  them  be  remem- 
bered. They  then  begged  for  some  for  absent  members 
of  their  families,  and  for  strangers  who  might  visit 
them.  But  their  greatest  interest  was  excited  l)y  some 
large  coloured  Scripture  prints  which  Mr.  Wyatt  had 
brouglit.  All,  save  one  individual,  pressed  forward 
to  hear  them  explained.  The  exception  was  the 
wife    of    the    chief    man,    a    fine    intelligent-looking 

X  2 


308  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

woman,  who,  evidently  ashamed  in  our  presence  of 
her  scanty  attire,  sat  brooding  over  the  fire  and  tried 
hard  to  take  no  notice.  But  when  Philip  spoke  of 
God  as  having  sent  His  Son  into  the  world  to  take  our 
nature  upon  Him,  and  a  picture  of  the  babe  lying 
in  the  manger  at  Bethlehem  was  shown,  the  poor 
Indian  matron  could  not  resist  that  attraction,  but 
quietly  crept  close  to  us,  and  became  from  that 
moment  most  deeply  interested  in  the  narrative  of 
the   Saviour's  life. 

When  the  Bishop  and  party  again  landed,  we  had 
nearly  completed  the  series.  From  the  manger  we 
had  come  to  the  cross.  He  found  our  little  audience 
gazing  intently  on  a  lithograph  of  the  Crucifixion,  and 
through  the  interpreter  addressed  them  on  that  solemn 
subject.  The  singing  of  the  100th  Psalm,  followed  by 
prayer  and  the  Benediction,  completed  this,  the  first 
missionary  service  among  them. 

The  sun  was  now  high  in  the  heavens.  Gladly 
would  we  have  remained  longer  with  those  Indians, 
but  could  not.  It  would  also  have  been  pleasant  to 
have  visited,  under  their  guidance,  the  interesting 
tract  of  country  above  them,  the  blue  outline  of 
which  was  visible  from  their  settlement. 

They  could  have  gone  with  us,  they  said,  in  about 
three  hours,  to  the  lowest  fall,  the  cascade  of  Idure- 
wadcle,  and  in  less  than  a  day  to  Itabru  cataract. 
Above  these  are  the  falls  and  rapids,  said  to  be  more 
than   forty   in   number,   of   the    Christmas^   cataracts, 

^  Scliomburgk's  party  spent  the  Christmas  of  1836  at  those  cata- 
racts, aud  named  them  after  that  festival.     None  of  the  Indians 


THE  BEBBTCE.  309 

which  cost  Schomburgk's  exploring  party  such  labour 
and  peril  to  surmount ;  and  where,  on  their  return, 
one  of  his  companions,  rashly  standing  on  the  thwarts 
of  the  canoe  while  "shooting"  a  fall,  upset  it,  and 
was  drowned. 

Large  alligators  (or  caymans)  a1)ound  there.  They 
lie  like  logs  of  wood  at  the  foot  of  cataract  or  rapid, 
ready  to  snatch  and  swallow  whatever  the  increased 
rapidity  of  the  current  may  bring  down  to  them.^ 

At  no  great  distance  above,  though  only  to  be 
reached  with  much  toil  and  difficulty,  is  the  lagoon 
where  the  above-named  traveller  discovered  the  mag- 
nificent lily  of  the  Berbice — the  now  world-famed 
Victoria  Regia. 

From  the  Acawoio  settlement  where  we  then  were, 
to  the  highest  point  explored  on  the  Berbice,  the 
distance  in  a  direct  line  is  little  more  than  one  degree 
of  latitude,  though  it  would  have  taken  many  weeks 
to  surmount  the  impediments  which  intervene. 

The  upper  cataracts  could  only  be  passed  by  an  ex- 
pedition specially  fitted  out  (with  stores  and  hawsers) 
for  that  purpose,  but  the  two  lower  were  within  easy 
reach  from  the  point  we  had  attained — had  duty 
permitted  us  to  spare  but  a  few  hours.  With  a 
feeling  of  natural  regret,  therefore,  we  left  them — 
unvisited,  though  so  near.  But  we  had  done,  how- 
knew  of  any  name  previously  given  them,  or  had  helieved  it  pos- 
sible to  surmount  them. 

^  "  The  upper  river  Berbice  seemed,  above  all  others,  to  swarm 
with  those  horrid  monsters." — Schomburgk's  Natural  History  of 
the  Fishes  of  Guiana. 


310  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

ever  imperfectly,  the  work  we  came  to  do — had  given 
a  call  in  Christ's  name  to  the  few  Acawoios  in  this 
part.  It  was  indeed  a  very  little  seed,  and  cast 
upon  ground  totally  unprepared  hj  man's  labour,  but 
God  could  cause  it  to  take  root,  and  fruit  to  follow. 

Our  swifi  run  down  the  river  was  attended  by 
no  incident  of  importance.  We  again  visited  Mapa 
Lake,  and  again  our  pilots  took  a  false  channel  in 
leaving  it.  The  crews  of  the  two  boats  had  been 
merry,  each  at  the  other's  expense,  respecting  the 
former  mistakes,  and  were  now  proceeding  side  by 
side  in  a  wrong  course,  till  our  Indian,  by  the 
absence  of  current,  detected  the  error,  and  we  had 
to  try  back  again. 

The  white  sand-hill  was  passed  by  night.  Masses 
of  watery  cloud  were  flitting  over  the  moon,  and 
the  white  precipice,  high  above  the  river,  resembled 
a  giant  phantom,  fitfully  gleaming  forth  for  a  few 
minutes  in  the  light,  and  then  apparently  sinking 
back  in  the  returning  gloom. 

We  reached  Coomacka  at  the  appointed  time, 
having  accomplished  our  last  two  forced  stages 
through  torrents  of  rain.  The  next  day  Jeremiah's 
house  was  filled  with  his  countrymen  from  the 
Etooni,  Wikkie,  and  other  streams,  and  by  the 
respectable  settlers  from  the  neighbourhood.  Among 
the  Indians  was  a  young  woman  whose  father,  and 
the  other  members  of  her  family,  had  been  massacred 
by  hired  Acawoios  some  years  before,  as  has  been 
related.^ 

1  Part  IT.  chnp.   v. 


THE  BERBICE.  311 

Two  more  stages  brought  us  into  the  neighbour- 
hood of  the  Hitia  Arawaks,  who,  true  to  their 
appointment,  came  from  their  settlements  to  meet  us. 

A  few  days  later  our  party  separated  at  New 
Amsterdam.  By  the  end  of  the  week  Philip  and 
myself  had  returned  to  the  other  end  of  the  colony. 
The  former  on  reaching  his  forest  home  had  travelled, 
both  ways  included,  700  miles, — a  good  distance  even 
for  an  Acawoio.  We  soon  after  heard  that  his 
countrymen  whom  we  had  visited  in  the  vicinity 
of  the  Berbice  falls  had  been  down  to  Coomacka' 
for  further  instruction. 

From  the  above  imperfect  sketch,  the  reader  may 
gather  that  the  Arawaks  of  the  Berbice  had  made  a 
considerable  advance  since  the  revival  of  missionary 
labour  there.  Very  much,  indeed,  remained  to  be 
done,  but  it  was  evident  to  us  that  many  Indians 
as  well  as  settlers  were  believers  in  Christ,  and 
attentive  to  moral  and  religious  duties.  There  were 
probably  about  250  settlers  in  the  mission  district 
at  the  time  of  our  visit,  and  500  Arawaks.  The 
latter  were  said  to  have  greatly  diminished  of  late 
years.  But  those  numbers  are  not  given  as  exact, 
and  there  may  be  more. 

To  conclude  our  notice  of  the  Berbice.  The 
savannahs,  which  are  a  peculiar  feature  of  the  country 
watered   by    that   fine    stream,    extend    eastward    to 

^  A  station  was,  some  time  after,  formed  at  Coomacka,  and  the 
Eev.  Mr.  Dance  placed  as  missionary  there.  The  neighbouring 
Indians  and  others  willingly  aided  in  the  erection  of  a  cottage  and 
a  building  to  be  used  as  a  chapel-school. 


312  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

the  Corentyn,  and  westward  to  the  Demerara.  They 
are  from  twenty  to  eighty  feet  above  the  level  of 
the  river.  Though  the  soil  is  probably  only  suited 
for  pasturage,  the  breeze  that  blows  over  them  is 
most  pure  and  bracing.  Favourite  spots  were  re- 
sorted to  by  the  old  Dutch  colonists  for  health  and 
recreation. 

The  view  from  Coomacka  across  those  downs 
resembled  certain  parts  of  England  more  than  a 
tropical  region.  There  were  indeed  neither  hedgerows, 
nor  village  spires,  and  no  white  flocks  dotted  the 
landscape ;  but  small  copses  were  scattered  here 
and  there,  and  a  line  of  trees,  seen  among  the  un- 
dulations, marked  the  course  of  the  distant  Etooni. 
The  air  was  temperate  and  the  breeze  refreshing. 
Coveys  of  "  besuru"  sprang  up  before  us  with  a 
whirring  noise,  so  like  partridges  that  one  might 
for  the  moment  almost  have  expected  to  see  the 
sportsman  in  quest  of  them  with  dog  and  gun. 
The  illusion  (recalling  scenes  which  I  had  not  re- 
visited for  many  long  years)  was  broken  by  glimpses 
of  the  leaves  and  golden  fruit  of  the  Awarra  palm, 
peeping  from  beneath  the  taller  trees — by  swarms 
of  dust-like  flies  entering  eyes,  ears,  and  nostrils — 
and  by  the  care  necessary  to  avoid  the  rattlesnakes, 
which  are  found  on  those  dry  and  elevated  lands ; — 
"  One,  one,  not  many,"  said  my  quiet  Araw^k  guide. 
— Still,  notwithstanding  snakes,  flies,  and  other  points 
of  difference,  it  was  impossible  to  look  upon  the 
scene  without  thinking  of  that  which  the  wander- 
ing Briton  and  the  Anglo-American  equally  call  "  the 


THE  CORENTYN.  313 

old  country."  It  recalled  to  mind  the  touching  lines, 
written  in  the  far  distant  East,  in  which  the  good 
Bishop  Heber  expressed  the  feelings  of  those  who, 
amidst  the  glowing  luxuriance  of  "Indian  bowers," 
still  think  on  and  long  for  the  temperate  bracing 
clime,  and  "  good  greenwood"  of  their  mother  land  : — 

"And  bless,  beneath  the  pahny  shade, 
Her  hazel  and  her  hawthorn  glade, 
And  breathe  a  prayer  (how  oft  in  vain) 
To  gaze  upon  her  oaks  again  ! " 


The  CoRENTYN,  to  the  eastward  of  the  Berbice, 
forms  the  boundary  of  the  colony  on  that  side.  It 
is  a  river  only  inferior  in  size  to  the  Essequibo, 
and  is  supposed  to  have  its  source  near  the  Ecpiator, 
in  the  same  mountain  chain,  the  Sierra  Acarai. 

Though  a  large  river,  the  banks  of  the  Corentyn 
are  very  thinly  inhabited.  It  was  considered  in- 
ferior to  the  Berbice  for  the  purposes  of  colonization, 
and  left  by  the  Dutch  to  its  aboriginal  inhabitants, 
now  fast  dwindling  away. 

The  district  occupied  by  the  Indians,  who  are  of 
the  Arawak,  Warau,  and  Caribi  races,  commences 
about  forty  miles  from  its  mouth,  at  Orealla,  the 
"  chalk"  hills,  and  does  not  extend  very  far.  Al)Ove 
the  last  Carib  settlement  all  is  desolate.  The  voyager 
passes  day  after  day  through  the  wildest  and  most 
romantic  scenery,  meeting  numerous  islands,  rocks, 
and  rapids ; — but  though  the  handiwork  of  man  in 
days    long   past    may    be    seen    in   rude   carvings   on 


314  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

the  perpendicular  sides  of  tlie  rocks,  there  are  no 
human  habitations  on  the  banks  of  the  river,— no 
lio'ht  canoes  on  its  waters, — and  the  solitude  is 
oppressive. 

At  length,  in  about  nine  days'  voyage,  the  Falls 
are  reached,  and  the  traveller's  patience  rewarded  by 
the  scene  which  meets  his  view. 

Enormous  rocks,  heaped  together,  oppose  further 
progress  even  on  foot;  immense  chasms  yawn  beneath, 
and  at  certain  places  the  streams  disappear  as  if  by 
magic,  and  make  their  reappearance  where  least  ex- 
pected. The  thundering  noise,  and  hovering  mist, 
in  which  thousands  of  birds  disport  tliemselves,  mark 
the  position  of  the  larger  falls ;  but  the  scene  is 
too  extensive  for  the  whole  to  be  beheld  in  its  full 
grandeur  from  any  single  point  of  view. 

Those  great  cataracts  of  the  Corentyn  have  been 
seen  by  few  save  the  Indians  themselves.  Schom- 
burgk  considered  them  as  superior  in  grandeur  to 
anything  he  had  met  with  iu  Guiana.^  Subsequently 
to  his  explorations,  an  expedition,  consisting  of 
Governor  (afterwards  Sir  Henry)  Barkly,  the  Bishop 
of  Guiana,  and  others  of  the  principal  colonists, 
reached  them  in  1852.  Few  others  have  visited 
them. 

In  days  of  old,  when  the  Caribs  were  supreme  in 
Guiana,  this  river  was  one  of  their  favourite  abodes. 

1  The  most  -western  of  tlie  falls  was  named  by  him  after  the 
then  governor,  Sir  James  Carmichael  Smyth,  the  eastern  after  Sir 
John  Barrow.  The  Caribs  have  their  own  names  for  these,  and 
other  parts  of  the  Great  Falls  of  the  Corentyn. 


To  face  p  314 


- .\<\^'^^^fr- ' '!* 


M&NHajihiart  lith 


TIMEHRI    OR  CAR/ED    ROCKS    ON  THE  PJVER   CORENT'/N. 
(Skptohed  hy    Cap>  Allen.) 


THE  rOKENTYN.  315 

Large  numbers  lived  on  its  banks,  keeping  up  a  com- 
munication between  tbeir  brethren  on  the  Surinam 
and  other  eastern  rivers,  aud  those  on  the  Upper 
Essequibo,  Caroni,  and  Orinoco  to  the  west.  All 
these  aided  each  other  in  their  predatory  expeditions 
and  exterminating  wars. 

In  later  times  the  Corentyn  became  a  great  channel 
of  the  slave-trade,  which  that  man-hunting  tribe  carried 
on  with  the  interior.  They  used  to  ascend  it  some 
distance  above  the  great  falls,  and  thence  striking 
overland,  cross  the  Berbice  on  their  Avay  to  the  Esse- 
quibo. The  territory  to  the  westward  of  that  river 
was  their  chief  hunting-ground,  and  the  Macusis 
their  usual  game — the  slaves  so  captured  being 
brought  down  the  Corentyn,  latterly  to  the  colony 
of  Surinam. 

When  Schomburgk  ascended  this  river  in  1836, 
that  nefarious  traffic  Avas  still  carried  on.  He  found 
three  Macusi  women  in  captivity  at  the  Caribi  settle- 
ment Tomatai.  Another  having  recently  attempted 
to  escape  from  them,  had  been  recaptured  and  sent 
on  to  the  Dutch  settlements  on  the  Copename. 

At  the  time  of  that  traveller's  visit,  the  Caribs  had 
a  large  slaving  expedition  in  course  of  preparation. 
They  rightly  considered  that  his  ]Dresence  on  the 
Upper  Corentyn  would  interfere  with  their  j)lans, 
and  therefore  withheld  from  him  the  knowledge  of 
a  small  stream  and  path  hy  which  they  had  been 
accustomed  to  avoid  the  (otherwise  fatal)  impediment 
to  navigation  presented  by  the  Great  Falls.  Three 
canoes  of  Caribs  followed  his   expedition   uninvited, 


316  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

and  uniting  with  their  brethren  whom  the  traveller 
had  hired  as  paddlers,  they  overawed  the  Arawak 
and  AVarau  portion  of  his  crews,  none  of  whom 
had  previously  passed  that  way.  Their  conduct 
prevented  his  further  progress,  and  was,  at  the  time, 
inexplicable. 

After  the  expedition,  thus  defeated  in  its  object, 
had  returned  to  the  post  Orealla,  a  canoe,  forty  feet 
in  length,  arrived  with  Caribs  from  the  Wayambo, 
who  exhibited  a  pass  from  the  Dutch  authorities. 
That  party  openly  stated  that  they  were  bound  to 
the  Macusi  country  for  slaves,  and  that  the  Corentyn 
Caribs  had  engaged  to  go  with  them.  This  explained 
the  secret  reasons  for  the  conduct  of  the  latter.^ 

Their  expedition,  however,  did  not  proceed  imme- 
diately. An  old  sorcerer,  who  had  planned  it,  was 
then  suffering  from  a  pulmonary  complaint.  Schom- 
burgk,  from  unmistakeable  symptoms,  had  told  them 
that  his  end  was  approaching,  and  that  event  hap- 
pening soon  after  the  prediction,  excited  their  super- 
stitious fears,  delayed  for  a  time  their  voyage,  and 
eventually  modified  their  plans.  During  that  delay 
the  traveller,  baffled  by  them  on  the  Corentyn,  had 
penetrated  the  interior  by  way  of  the  Berbice  cataracts ; 
and  great  was  the  astonishment  of  the  Carib  chief 

^  The  Caribs  ■whom  Schombiirgk  had  hired  as  paddlers,  also 
feared  that  it  "vvas  his  intention  to  visit  the  country  of  the  Amazons, 
or  women  without  husbands  (called  by  them  Wori-samacos) ;  and 
that,  if  they  went,  they  Avould  be  detained  some  months  among 
them.  They,  equally  with  the  western  tribes,  believed  in  the 
existence  of  that  female  republic ;  but  they  supposed  it  to  be 
located  nearer  to  themselves,  and  on  the  head  of  the  Corentyn. 


THE  CORENTYN.  317 

"  Smittee  "  (Smith)  and  his  men,  when  they  saw  the 
boats  of  his  apparently  ubiquitous  expedition  before 
them  on  that  river,  at  the  path  leading  to  the  Esse- 
quibo  !  They  professed  penitence, — told  him  that  they 
had  given  up  all  design  of  making  slaves,  and  now 
only  intended  friendly  traffic  with  the  Macusis,  in 
proof  of  which  they  showed  him  that  they  had  brought 
their  wives  and  children  with  them,  whom  they  never 
take  on  warlike  or  predatory  expeditions. 

They  had  not,  however,  finally  abandoned  that 
practice.  When  Mr.  A.  Winter,  Captain  Allen,  and 
two  other  gentlemen  ascended  the  Corentyn  a  few 
years  later,  they  found  those  same  Caribs,  at  Tomatai, 
celebrating  their  return  from  a  recent  expedition. 
They  had  brought  back  A\ith  them  many  articles  of 
value  to  Indians,  and  also  a  young  Macusi  female, 
a  slave,  whom  it  was  observed  they  kept  hard  at 
work  grating  cassava,  while  they  were  all  in  full 
paint,  enjoying  the  revels.  An  Arawak  girl,  whom 
they  had  carried  off  from  the  Berbice  a  few  years 
before,  was  also  present,  and  recognised  by  her  brother, 
who  had  come  with  the  white  men  as  one  of  their 
crew.  Their  meeting  was  unexpected  and  aftecting ; 
but  a  young  Caribi  lover  or  husband,  and  the  birth 
of  two  children,  had  reconciled  the  female  in  a  great 
measure  to  her  captivity. 

The  Carib  chief  accompanied  that  party  to  the 
cataracts,  and  showed  the  portage  they  had  cun- 
ningly concealed  from  Schomburgk,  with  the  timbers 
laid,  over  which  they  used  to  haul  their  own 
canoes. 


318  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

From  these  accounts  the  reader  may  see  how  pre- 
valent the  Indian  slave-trade  has  been,  and  how 
recently  carried  on,  even  within  our  boundaries.  It 
still  prevails  on  the  southern  borders  of  our  colony 
and  the  northern  tributaries  of  the  Amazon,  and  its 
miseries  may  in  great  part  account  for  the  wasting 
away  of  many  Indian  tribes. 

While  that  practice,  with  the  vices  wdiich  ever 
attend  it,  existed  in  force,  the  continual  demoraliza- 
tion of  the  Caribs  was  inevitable,  as  also  of  less 
powerful  tribes,  by  their  influence  and  example. 
From  the  abolition  of  slavery  in  Surinam  that  evil 
custom  has,  in  the  coast  regions,  probably  received 
its  death-wound — not,  however,  until  the  tribe  which 
chiefly  practised  it  has  nearly  disappeared  from  the 
face  of  the  earth. 

In  the  brief  outline  given  in  a  former  chapter  of 
the  Moravian  labours,  we  have  shown  how  their 
mission  on  the  Dutch  side  of  the  Corentyn,  after 
various  calamities,  including  fire  and  wasting  sick- 
nesses, was  finally  abandoned. 

Though  never  forgotten,  and  visited  from  time  to 
time  by  English  clergymen  and  others  from  the  cul- 
tivated district  near  the  river's  mouth,  the  Indians 
of  Corentyn  remained  without  a  resident  minister  or 
teacher.  Our  missions  in  other  places  were  in  a 
very  precarious  state,  as  we  have  seen ;  some  of 
them  lying  vacant  for  long  periods.  Having  a  hard 
struggle  to  hold  the  ground  we  had  occupied  in  the 
west,  our  labours  could  only  be  extended  eastward 
Ijy  slow  degrees. 


THE  CORENTYN.  319 

Meanwhile  the  aborigines,  left  to  the  vices  of  neigh- 
bourino-  civilization  ^yithout  the  antidote  of  Christian 
teaching,  diminished  rapidly.  The  Post-holder's  re- 
turns gave  752  in  1831,  575  in  1838.  In  18 (56, 
245  were  found  on  the  western  side,  and  very  few 
on  the  other,  by  the  Rev.  W.  T.  Veuess,  who  went 
through  all  their  settlements  at  the  request  of  the 
Bishop,  and  gave  a  most  interesting  though  mournful 
account  of  their  condition. 

He  found  the  proportion  of  children  surprisingly 
small — an  average  of  one  child  only  to  each  couple. 
Among  the  same  tribes  at  our  western  missions 
(Waramuri  especially),  children  swarm. 

The  pure  Caribs  had  almost  disappeared.  There 
were  only  twenty-nine  in  the  district  who  claimed 
to  be  of  that  once  numerous  and  dominant  race, 
and  of  these  only  three  were  unmixed  with  negro 
blood.  Of  the  other  Indians,  79  were  Waraus, 
and  137  Arawaks.  About  forty  of  the  latter  trilie 
were  gathered  for  Divine  service  by  Mr.  Veness  at 
the  residence  of  Mrs.  de  Wolff,  widow  of  the  former 
Post-holder  at  Orealla. 

The  Waraus  held  themselves  aloof  on  that  occa- 
sion, in  obedience,  it  was  thought,  to  their  captain 
and  chief  sorcerer,  Christmas,  a  man  who,  though 
blind,  exercised  unlimited  control  over  them.  Mr. 
Veness  mentions,  as  "  a  striking  instance  of  the 
deeds  of  cruelty  which  prevail  where  men's  hearts 
are  not  softened  by  the  mild  and  genial  influence 
of  the  Gospel,"  that  he  had  been  deprived  of  sight 
by  his  own  wife.     It  appears  that  she  did  not  come 


320  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

up  to  even  the  Warau  standard  of  morality,  and 
her  husband  frequently  complained  of  her  gadding 
propensities.  At  length  she  found  him  in  his  ham- 
mock one  day,  in  a  state  of  partial  inebriation,  and 
deliberately  stabbed  him  in  the  eyes  with  a  knife, 
saying  that  "  now  he  could  not  see  when  she  left  her 
home."  That  woman  afterwards  lived  with  another 
man,  who,  having  his  jealous  and  revengeful  feelings 
excited  by  her  licentious  conduct,  gave  vent  to  them 
by  hamstringing  her. 

Polygamy,  as  we  may  suj)pose,  was  prevalent  on 
the  Corentyn.  Several  Indians  had  each  two  wives, 
and  some  had  three.  Among  the  latter  was  the 
blinded  sorcerer  above  mentioned.  A  young  girl  is 
sometimes  given  as  payment  for  the  professional 
services  of  the  piai-man  during  sickness,  which  may 
account  for  the  scale  of  his  domestic  establishment. 

At  one  place,  Mr.  Veness  found  about  thirty 
Waraus  engaged  in  the  ordinary  native  dance.  "  It 
was  little  more  than  a  measured  series  of  stej)s, 
accompanied  with  stamping,  while  the  persons  ad- 
vanced or  receded,  sometimes  in  single  rank,  some- 
times in  two  ranks  facing  each  other,  having  their 
rioht  arms  over  their  rioht-hand  neio;hbour's  shoulders, 
and  their  left  arms  round  their  left-hand  neighbour  s 
waist,  swaying  their  bodies  to  and  fro.  Occa- 
sionally the  women  would  run,  and  inserting  them- 
selves between  the  men,  join  in  the  dance.  The 
effect  was  somewhat  heightened  by  a  monotonous 
chant  sung  in  unison,  and  by  the  clatter  of  bracelets 
and  anklets  made   of   hard  seeds  and   the   wings  of 


THE  CORENTYN  AND  SURINAM.  321 

beetles.  The  dance  was  intended  to  represent  the 
antics  of  a  herd  of  kairounies,  or  bush-hogs,  and 
the  chant  ATas  a  succession  of  mocking  or  jeering 
expressions." 

At  another  place  he  found  a  number  of  Indians 
drinking  paiwari,  the  women  handing  round  bowls 
of  that  beverage  filled  from  large  earthen  jars. 
On  such  occasions  the  Indians,  though  intoxicated 
even  to  vomiting,  will  not  cease  their  potations 
while  any  of  the  liquor  remains.  By  engaging 
them  in  conversation,  and  singing  hymns  at  their 
request  in  the  clear  star-light,  ]\Ir.  Veness  was  able 
to  stop  their  carouse,  and  from  what  passed  that 
evening,  thought  that  it  would  not  be  a  very  difficult 
task  for  a  zealous  Christian  teacher  to  wean  them 
from  their  heathenish  practices. 

His  able  report  was  followed  by  efforts  for  the 
establishment  of  a  small  mission  station  at  Orealla, 
a  step  most  necessary,  both  for  the  welfare  of  the 
Indians  on  the  Corentyn,  and  as  completing  the 
chain  of  missions  across  our  province  from  west  to 
east : — so  that  the  migratory  Indian  or  settler  of 
any  race  may  find,  on  each  of  the  main  rivers,  a 
place  of  Christian  worship  or  instruction  provided 
to  give,  or  keep  alive  in  his  mind,  the  knowledge 
of  his  God  and  Saviour. 


SuniNAM,  or.  Dutch  Guiana,  lies  beyond  the 
Corentyn,  extending  eastward  to  the  Marowdni  (or 
Maroni).      Its  most  important  river  is   the  Surinam, 

Y 


322  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

with  its  affluent,  the  Comowini :  between  which 
and  our  territory  are  the  Saramaca,  Copename,  and 
other  streams. 

Many  thousands  of  bush-negroes  dwell  in  the 
interior.  They  are  a  more  hardy  race  than  the 
aborigines ;  and  have  increased  in  numbers  and 
power  as  the  latter  have  diminished. 

The  Caribs  and  Arawaks  are  the  most  numerous 
of  the  Indian  tribes  inhabiting  Surinam.  They  differ 
little  from  their  brethren  described  in  the  foregoing 
pages. 

The  Caribs  chiefly  inhabit  the  Marowini,  Copename, 
Tibiti,  and  Wayambo,  They  are,  as  elsewhere,  indo- 
lent and  haughty.  Many  are  partly  of  negro  blood ; 
and  such  are  hardier  as  well  as  darker  than  the 
pure  Caribs. 

The  Arawaks  are  thinly  spread  over  the  country. 
They  are,  as  with  us,  intelligent  and  skilful  axe- 
men. 

The  Waraus,  few  in  number,  live  near  the  Nikeri 
and  Corentyn. 

Another  and  wilder  tribe  inhabits  the  mountain 
region  near  the  head  of  the  Marowini.  They  possess 
fine  hunting  dogs,  which  they  barter  with  the  bush- 
negroes,  but  hold  themselves  aloof  from  the  culti- 
vated parts  of  the  colony. 

The  total  number  of  Indians  in  Surinam  has 
been  variously  estimated  at  from  2,000  to  nearly 
4,000 ;  and  of  these  there  are  many  of  mixed  race. 
All  agree  that  their  fondness  for  rum,  with  other 
causes,  is  rapidly  diminishing  their  numbers. 


SURINAM  AND  CAYENNE.  323 

The  early  Moravian  missions  among  tlie  Indians 
on  the  Cottica  and  Saramaca,  and  their  fate,  have 
been  ah*eady  noticed.  Members  of  the  various  tribes 
are  found  among  the  congregations  of  that  body  ; 
but  there  appears  to  be  no  mission  east  of  our 
colony  established  for  the  especial  benefit  of  Indians. 


Cayenne,  or  French  Guiana,  lies  beyond  the  broad 
and  rocky  Marowini  :  on  which  establishments  con- 
taining thousands  of  convicts  from  the  mother  country 
have  been  formed. 

Between  that  river  and  the  eastern  boundary 
the  relics  of  four  or  five  Indian  tribes  are  met  with. 
The  entire  number  of  aborigines  has  been  stated  in 
the  ofiicial  journal  of  Cayenne  as  not  exceeding 
1,800  ;  while  of  the  bush-negroes  dwelling  on  the 
Upper  Marowini  alone  there  were  1,400  or  1,500.^ 

A  feeble  remnant  of  the  once  powerful  Galibis 
(Caribs)  is  thinly  scattered  among  the  various  rivers. 

In  the  interior,  on  both  sides  of  the  mountain 
range  of  Tumuc-Humac  or  Tumucurague,  the  Rou- 
couyennes  are  found. 

The  Emerillons  live  between  the  Aprouague  and 
the  Oyapok. 

The  Aramisas  dwell  beyond  the  last-named  tribe, 
at  the  head  of  the  Aroua. 

The  Oyampis  inhabit  the  Upper  Oyapok,  and  are 
found  on  both  banks  of  that  river. 

^  Feiiille  de  la  Guyane  rran9aise,  June  2d,  1866. 
Y    2 


324  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

To  the  above  we  may  add  a  few  Tapuyo  Indians, 
refugees  from  Brazil. 

Though,  the  Indian  tribes  of  French  Guiana  differ 
more  or  less  from  ours  iu  name  and  language,  their 
customs  and  habits  of  life  are  much  the  same.  They 
have  the  same  skill  in  hunting  and  fishing ;  use  the 
same  scanty  apparel ;  and  have  apparently  the  same 
ideas  of  the  beautiful — their  women  enlarging  the 
calf  of  the  leg  in  the  manner  of  our  Caribs,  by  tight 
bands  above  the  ankle  and  below  the  knee. 

They  live  in  a  state  of  independence,  save  that 
their  chiefs  are  appointed  to,  or  confirmed  in,  their 
office  by  the  Governor,  as  in  the  other  colonies  ; 
receiving  a  silver-headed  staff  as  the  symbol  of  their 
rank.  On  grand  occasions  they  usually  array  them- 
selves in  some  old  uniform,  without  much  regard  to 
its  exact  significance  :  the  chief  of  the  Oyampis  (an 
inland  tribe),  wearing  that  of  a  cajDtain  in  the  French 
navy,  which  his  father,  Waninika  (who  afterwards 
fell  fighting  bravely  against  the  bush- negroes),  had 
received  as  a  present  from  a  former  Governor. 

The  state  of  warfare  in  which  the  Indians,  both  of 
Cayenne  and  Surinam,  have  been  from  time  to  time 
engaged  with  those  people,  wliose  losses  were  con- 
tinually recruited  and  their  numbers  increased  by 
fresh  African  runaways  from  the  Dutch  plantations, 
must  have  greatly  aided  other  influences  in  diminishing 
their  numbers. 

More  than  twenty  tribes,  as  the  Trios,  Racalets, 
Palicouras,  Nouragucs,  &c.  &c.  mentioned  by  the 
early  explorers  and  former  missionaries  in  Cayenne, 


CAYENNE.  325 

have  either  become  extinct,  or  mingled  with  the  few 
at  present  found.  ^ 

Thus,  within  and  around  the  three  colonies  of 
Guiana  during  the  last  three  centuries,  many  races 
have  passed  away  in  heathen  darkness.  Let  "  all 
who  profess  and  call  themselves  Chiistians,"  what- 
ever their  "  unhappy  divisions,"  join  at  least  in  lift- 
ing up  a  prayer  for  the  survivors, — "  the  remnant 
that  are  left." 

^  La  Guyane  Frangaise  en  1865,  by  M.  Leon  Eiviere,  chap.  ix. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

ABOVE      THE      FALLS. 

Decline  of  the  Aborigines — Desolate  Eegions — Paths  from  River 
to  Eiver — The  Country  above  the  Falls  crossed  in  1839 — 
Missionary  Expedition  to  the  Acawoios  residing  there  in 
1867. 

Indian  Tribes  near  the  Sources  of  the  Essequibo,  and  on  the  Bra- 
zilian Border. 

In  the  eastern  provinces  of  Guiaiia,  briefly  noticed 
in  the  last  chapter,  the  bush-negroes,  as  we  have 
seen,  gradually  increasing  in  number  and  strength, 
occupied  a  great  portion  of  the  Indian  territory. 
Adopting  the  habits  of  the  aborigines,  they  assumed 
even  the  beads,  feathered  head-dresses,  and  other 
articles  of  Indian  adornment ;  and  regarded  with  great 
contempt  the  negroes  of  the  plantations.  Under  the 
names  of  Youca,  Boni,  &c.,  their  clans  occupy  certain 
inland  districts  far  to  the  eastward  of  the  Corentyn, 
and  have  strongholds  among  the  cataracts  of  the 
Upper  Marowini,  and  the  swamps  of  Surinam.^ 

^  Many  superstitious  and  barbarous  customs,  derived  from  their 
African  forefathers,  are  followed  by  those  wild  clans. 

M.  Leprieur,  a  French  naturalist  and  explorer,  who  in  1836  fell  in 
with  a  party  of  those  negroes  near  the  Aroua,  was  taken  to  a  small 
island,  and  there  obliged  to  mingle  his  blood  with  theirs,  and  driidc 


ABOVE  THE  FALLS.  327 

The  territory  which,  within  our  boundary,  extends 
from  the  Upper  Corentyn  westward  above  tlie  cataracts 
of  the  Berbice,  appears  to  be  ahnost,  or  altogether, 
uninhabited.  Vast  tracts  in  which  the  Timehri,  or 
hieroglyphics  on  rocks,  show  traces  of  former  Indian 
inhabitants,  now  lie  desolate.  The  war  (or  slave) 
path  of  the  Caribs  from  Eastern  Guiana.,  intersecting 
that  reo'ion,  must  have  1o]iq;  ao;o  rendered  it  unsafe 
for  other  tribes. 

In  the  more  distant  parts  of  the  interior,  the 
Indians,  though  not  unfriendly  to  our  colonists,  have 
been  neither  protected  nor  controlled  by  them.  Being 
virtually  independent,  they  follow  their  ancient  cus- 
toms, prosecute  their  blood-feuds,  enslave  the  weak, 
and  do  generally  what  is  right  in  their  own  eyes. 

The  Acawoios  whom  we  visited  at  their  settlement 
just  below  the  Berbice  cataracts  told  us  that  (with 
the  exception  of  five  other  families)  they  were  all 
of  their  race  residing  on  that  river.  "  But,"  added 
their  chief,  pointing  towards  the  head  of  the  Demerara, 
"  many  are  living  on  that  side." 

the  mixture  diluted  with  water,  as  a  covenant  of  peace.  After 
this,  Lis  hosts  bravely  defended  his  person  against  the  attacks  of 
a  stronger  and  hostile  body  of  their  countrymen,  though  they  were 
unable  to  prevent  the  pillage  of  his  instruments  and  baggage. 

In  1861,  a  joint  expedition,  sent  by  the  French  and  Dutch. 
Governments  to  explore  the  Marowini  to  its  sources,  had  to  pause 
above  the  rapids  which  form  a  stronghold  of  the  Youcas,  while  the 
latter  made  an  offering  to  a  formidable-looking  rock,  supposed  to 
represent  the  tutelary  spirit  or  god  of  that  locality. 

Efforts  for  the  conversion  of  those  bush-negroes  have  been  made 
by  the  ]\Ioravians  of  Surinam.  Their  lieport  for  18G6  spoke  highly 
of  the  zeal  and  success  of  one  of  their  native  agents  among  them. 


328  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

Witli  a  view  to  the  spread  of  Christianity  among 

their  race  generally,  it  was  desirable  to  gather  further 

•  information  respecting  that  branch  of  it.      But  few 

educated  persons  had  ever  visited,  or  had  intercourse 

with  them. 

Mr.  Alexander  Winter,  of  Berbice,  had,  however, 
in  1839  crossed,  with  Mr.  W.  Nicolson,  directly 
through  their  territory.  He  kindly  furnished  me 
with  an  interesting  account  of  that  region,  and  the 
Indians  then  inhabiting  it. 

Those  gentlemen,  having  been  disappointed  in 
reaching  the  Berbice  cataracts  (the  shallowness  of 
the  river  at  that  season  not  allowing  their  boat  to 
approach  the  lowest  fall),  struck  overland  towards 
the  Demerara,  Mombaca,  before  mentioned,  was 
their  guide.  The  path  led  through  high  forest  land, 
abounding  with  the  useful  wallaba  timber.  On  the 
second  day  they  fell  in  with  Indians.  Mombaca's 
presence  insured  a  good  reception,  and  they  spent 
that  night  at  one  of  their  settlements. 

The  natives  were  hospitable,  and  seemed  an  amiable 
race.  They  were  apparently  very  happy,  having 
enough  for  their  own  wants,  and  not  being  desirous 
of  mixing  with  the  distant  world.  Dwelling  in  that 
secluded  district,  and  on  the  banks  of  small  rivulets, 
some  of  them,  the  travellers  were  told,  could  not 
even  swim. 

Their  wonder  was  greatly  excited  by  the  di-ess  and 
equipments  of  white  people,  whom  some  of  them  appa- 
rently had  not  seen  before.  A  pair  of  red  morocco 
slippers  became   objects    of  especial    admiration.     A 


ABOVE  THE  FALLS.  329 

group  of  women  collected  near  the  liamniock  in  which 
the  wearer  was  lying,  and  kept  whispering  among 
themselves  and  pointing,  till  one  of  them  ventured 
to  touch  them,  and  then  looked  at  her  fingers  to 
see  if  the  colour,  like  their  own  red  pigment,  would 
come  off. 

A  corkscrew  puzzled  them  greatly.  Without  bottle 
or  cork  its  use  could  not  satisfactorily  be  explained, 
and  so  it  remained  still  an  implement  very  mysterious 
in  their  eyes. 

At  night  they  celebrated  the  arrival  of  the  unex- 
pected visitors  (to  the  disgust  and  annoyance  of  Mr. 
Nicolson,  who  was  unwell)  by  dancing  round  their 
hammocks,  to  the  sound  of  their  rude  music,  for 
several  hours. 

The  next  morning  the  two  gentlemen  proceeded 
on  their  way,  escorted  by  ten  or  twelve  men  and 
boys  in  grand  costume,  i.e.  with  fresh  paint  on 
their  bodies,  and  feathered  crowns  on  their  heads. 
These,  with  four  or  five  flutes  and  a  drum,  marched 
ahead. — So  jovial  a  set  of  Indians  the  travellers  had 
never  before  seen. 

The  little  stream  on  which  were  situated  the  vil- 
lages of  that  primitive  and  secluded  people  is  called 
Atacopara.  Farther  on  the  travellers  found  it  navi- 
gable ;  and,  having  procured  wood-skins  at  another 
settlement,  they  reached  the  Demerara  at  sunset, 
at  a  point  far  above  the  cataract  known  as  the  great 
falls  of  that  river.  Schomburgk  having  reported 
the  Demerara  as  non-existent  at  the  place  where  he 
had  crossed  from  the  Berbice  to  the  Essequibo,  the 


330  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

two  travellers  ascended  it  in  their  wood-skins,  in 
the  hope  of  reaching  its  source. 

The  next  day  they  came  to  a  place  where  the 
river,  lessened  by  the  di'ought,  rushed  through  a 
channel  so  narrow  that  my  informant  was  able  to 
leap  across  it.  But,  from  a  neighbouring  bluff, 
crowned  with  an  Indian  settlement,  they  saw  its 
windings  like  a  silver  thread,  stretching  far  away, 
showing  its  source  to  be  still  distant.  As,  in  their 
overland  journey,  they  had  brought  no  stores  of 
provisions,  and  could  obtain  no  cassava  bread, 
they  were  compelled  to  return  without  further  ex- 
ploration. 

The  information  derived  from  the  above  and  other 
sources  led,  after  much  anxious  consultation,  to  a 
missionary  expedition  to  the  country  of  those  In- 
dians. We  decided  to  proceed  by  way  of  the  Falls 
of  the  Demerara.  The  party  consisted  of  the  Bishop, 
the  Rev.  Mr.  Wyatt,  Mr.  Gr.  Couch  man  (warden  of  the 
chapel  at  Malali  rapids,  who  voluntarily  acted  as 
pilot),  Philip  my  Acawoio  assistant,  and  myself 

We  arrived  at  the  foot  of  the  falls  on  the  after- 
noon of  the  26th  of  March,  1867,  and  ascended 
the  rugged  forest  path  leading  to  their  top.  The 
Demerara  here  precipitates  itself  in  one  body  over 
a  rocky  barrier.  Huge  masses  of  rock,  crowned 
with  stately  trees,  divide  it  into  several  channels 
ere  it  reaches  its  lower  bed.  Of  these  channels 
there  are  two  large  ones  in  the  centre,  with  smaller 
ones  on  either  side.  All  are  filled  with  great  boul- 
ders,   over    which    the    dark    waters    toss    and    dash. 


on 


'  M 


ABOVE  THE  FALL,^.  331 

until  tliey  roll  into  the  wide  basin  below,  covering 
its  sides  and  margin  with  masses  of  yeasty  foam.' 

Three-fourths  of  this  cataract  are  hidden  from 
view  by  the  luxuriant  forest  which  clothes  its  sides, 
and  covers  its  islands.  The  misty  spray  rising,  when 
the  river  is  full,  from  the  channels  between  the 
tall  trees  ;  the  rushing  noise ;  and  a  glimpse  of  the 
torrent,  here  and  there,  show  imperfectly  its  divided 
course.  Should  the  hand  of  civilization  ever  remove 
portions  of  that  leafy  screen,  the  Falls  of  the  Demerara, 
— though  not  entitled  to  the  epithet  of  "  Great"  when 
compared  with  many  cataracts  of  the  Western  world, — 
will  he  found  to  present  a  spectacle  full  of  beauty 
and  interest  to  those  who,  in  quest  of  healtli  or 
pleasure,  may  visit  them  from  the   distant  coast. 

The  weather  had  been  pleasant  while  we  examined 
the  falls,  but  evening  set  in  with  sudden  and  ominous 
ofloom.  Torrents  of  rain  and  an  awful  storm  of 
liohtninsf  and  thunder,  which  shook  the  rocks  around, 
crashed  among  the  trees  of  the  forest,  and  lasted 
far  into  the  night,  made  us  thankful  for  the  shelter 
of  a  neighbouring  Indian  settlement. 

The  next  morning  our  baggage  was  carried  above 
the  falls  : — the  two  boats,  in  which  we  had  reached 
them,  being  left  below.  Some  Acawoios  had  accom- 
panied us  in  a  wood-skin,  which  they  hauled  upon 

1  The  length  of  the  fall  appeared  to  be  between  300  and  400 
feet.  The  perpendicular  difference  between  the  levels  of  the  river 
above  and  below  was  ascertained  by  Mr.  Des  Voeux,  magistrate  of 
the  Demerara,  in  an  expedition  to  the  interior,  October  18GG,  who 
(from  memory)  gave  me  the  result  as  65  feet. 


332  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

the  rocks,  turned  bottom  upwards,  and  carried  on  their 
heads  along  the  rugged  path  leading  to  the  upper 
landing  place.  We  found  there  another  wood-skin 
of  larger  size.  Two  Indians  were  "  sewing  up  its 
ears,"  as  they  said,  i.e.  lashing  or  lacing  up  with 
bush-rope  the  downward  slits  which  are  made  on 
both  sides  near  the  stem  and  stern  to  give  those 
extremities  a  slight  spring  above  the  surface  of  the 
water. 

On  this  we  embarked ;  the  Indian  paddlers  squat- 
ting in  the  bottom,  and  the  passengers  being  seated 
on  boxes,  &c.,  which  that  frail  craft  had  to  carry, 
as  well  as  ten  persons.  The  flatness  of  these  wood- 
skins  renders  them,  however,  very  steady.  Ours 
bore  its  heavy  freight  easily,  though  its  sides  were 
only  three  or  four  inches  above  the  surface  of  the 
water. 

Our  bark  being  thus  well  laden,  the  rest  of  our 
baggage  was  placed  on  the  smaller  craft,  which 
had  been  brouojlit  over  from  below.  As  soon  as 
its  crew  were  seated,  the  water  flowed  in  at  the 
open  stern.  To  remedy  this,  a  large  lump  of  clay 
was  stuck  there,  which  one,  who  spoke  a  little 
English,  called  a  "back-dam." 

The  place  of  embarkation  was  sheltered  by  lofty 
trees,  and  protected  by  a  ledge  of  rocks  from  the 
current  of  the  fall,  which  rolls  over  at  a  distance 
of  not  more  than  100  feet.  It  required  some  skill 
to  emerge  from  this  recess  and  keep  the  heavily- 
laden  wood-skin  from  swino;ine:  broadside  to  the 
stream.     At  the  most  critical  moment,  a  young  Indian 


Ph 


ABOVE  THE  FALLS.  333 

in  the  bow,  named  "  Tiger,"  a  sturdy  fellow,  but  one 
who  had  never  before  occupied  such  a  responsible 
position,  looked  round  with  hesitation.  At  a  word 
promptly  given  by  Mr.  Couchman,  all  our  crew 
sprang  into  the  water,  and  jumping,  wading,  and 
swimming  from  rock  to  rock,  dragged  our  craft  along 
the  river-side  until  a  point  was  reached  from  which 
we  could  launch   forth  with  safety. 

After   a   few    hours'    paddle    we   met   three    small 
wood-skins,  on  Avhich  were  seated  a  party  of  Indian 
revellers,  young  men  and  women,  wdiose  bodies  and 
limbs    were    marked    all    over    with    black    paint,    in 
grotesque  patterns  ;  the  mouth  of  each  being  favoured 
with  an  especially  large  daub.     To  appear  with  dis- 
tinction at  a   grand    native   dance   or   carnival,  they 
had    apparently   endeavoured  (and    not    without  suc- 
cess) to  make  themselves  as  like  demons  as  possible. — 
Another  wood-skin  followed.     This   was   occupied  by 
a  young  man  of  bolder  taste  than  those  who  pi-eceded 
him.     Disdaining    the    use    of    any   pattern,   he    had 
produced   a   marked  effect  by   blackening  himself  all 
over,    save    on   the   nose    and    cheeks.      This   simple 
style    of    adornment,    combined    with    his    squatting 
attitude  and   shaggy  black  hair,  gave  him  a  striking 
resemblance    (save    in    size)    to    the    solemn    1)1  ack 
monkey  of  Guiana,  with  pinkish  face,  called  the  quata. 
Other  Indians   on   wood-skins  soon  after   came  in 
sight.      They  were  smeared  with  red  paint.      Since 
passing   the    falls,    we    seemed    to    have    entered    an 
enchanted   region,    where    goblins,    red,    black,    and 
mottled, — of   aquatic   habits, — came  skimming  along 


334  THE  INDIAN  TBIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

the  surface  to  meet  intruders.  But,  though  gro- 
tesque, they  were  uot  unfriendly.  Some  of  them, 
having  asked  our  errand,  turned   back  with  us. 

Towards  evening,  we  reached  a  settlement  where 
the  grand  entertainment  had  evidently  taken  place. 
Seventy-eight  Indians  stood  looking  down  on  our 
little  flotilla  from  a  precipitous  bank.  Some  of  them 
wore  feathered  crowns  ;  but  few  were  painted.  The 
Bishop,  beholding  such  an  assembly,  stood  up  in 
the  wood-skin  and  saluted  them.  His  salute  was 
returned  by  Kanaimapo,  the  principal  chief  of  those 
Waika-Acawoios,  a  strongly-built  man  of  about  sixty 
years  of  age,  who  came  to  the  front  of  his  people, 
and,  standing  on  the  edge  of  the  bank,  placed  both 
hands  on  his  breast  and  then  waved  them  in  token 
of  welcome. 

His  settlement,  called  Pongobai,  was  on  a  neigh- 
bourino;  hill.  A  huoe  rock,  like  a  massive  fraoiuent 
of  Cyclopean  masonry,  rises  from  the  river  close  to 
the  bank,  and  marks  the  landing-place. 

Thither  most  of  the  party,  who,  notwithstanding 
their  recent  festivity,  were  quite  sober,  followed  us. 
They  listened  that  night  with  eager  attention  to 
the  tracts  in  their  own  tongue,  and  to  Philip's  ex- 
planation of  the  Scripture  prints  with  which  they 
were  illustrated. 

Leaving  him  to  benefit  his  assembled  countrymen, 
we  proceeded  next  day  higher  up  the  river.  Passing 
a  small  but  beautiful  cascade  on  the  left  bank,  which 
comes  leaping  down  the  rocky  side  of  a  hill,  and 
falls    into   the    river  in    sheets    of   silvery    spray,  wc 


ABOVE  TEE  FALLS.  335 

went  throuoli  all  the  Indian  settlements  in  tliat  part, 
and  reached  Igook.  This  is  a  small  creek,  from 
which  a  path  (one  of  three  above  the  falls)  leads 
to  the  Essequibo,  striking  that  river  above  the 
AVaraputa  rapids,  and  at  no  great  distance  from  the 
sinsidar  aio-antic  rock,  which,  from  its  resemblance 
to  a  water-jar  with  its  cover,  is  called  Taquiari  or 
Comuti  by  the  Indians, 

On  our  return  to  the  village  of  Kanaimapo,  the 
old  chief  had  one  of  his  largest  houses  cleared  out 
for  the  performance  of  Divine  service.  Logs  of  wood 
were  raniied  all  around  to  serve  as  benches  for  his 
people.  On  these  more  than  150  Indians  seated 
themselves  as  darkness  set  in ;  their  copper  skins 
assuming  a  more  fiery  tint  in  the  red  light  cast  by 
the  burning  gum  of  the  simiri,  or  locust  tree,  or 
by  that  of  the  fragrant  hyawa,  the  incense  tree  of 
Guiana,  A  few  candles,  which  we  had  brouglit 
with   us,   aided  this   native  illumination. 

To  honour  Almighty  God,  in  giving  as  much 
solemnity  as  possible  to  this,  the  first  public  act  of 
Christian  worship  performed  among  those  people, 
each  of  the  clergy  present,  robed,  took  j)art  in  the 
service.  There  was,  of  course,  neither  pulj^it  nor 
desk,  and  not  even  a  table  could  be  procured.  But 
two  of  our  boxes  placed  one  on  the  other  made  a 
good  substitute,  and,  when  covered  with  a  blue  rug, 
looked  very  well.  Philip  stood  beside  us,  explained 
the  service,  and  interpreted  the  Bishop's  address, 
the  portion  of  Scripture  read,  and  other  instruction 
given     while  old  Kanaimapo,  surrounded  by  his  fine- 


336  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

looking  sons,  responded  from  time  to  time  in  the 
Indian  manner,  by  words  expressive  of  assent,  wonder, 
or  attention.  We  were  much  struck  with  the  man- 
ner in  which  the  Indians  tried  to  join  us  in  the 
hymns.  Without  understanding  one  line  of  the 
English  verses,  they  caught  up  and  helped  to  swell 
the  strains  of  the  Old  Hundredth  and  Hanover, 
with  a  sweetness  of  voice  and  correctness  of  ear 
which  surprised  us  greatly. 

Since  we  had  reached  the  Acawoio  country,  the 
work  of  instruction  had  been  carried  on  by  night 
as  well  as  by  day.  Philip  especially  was  almost 
worn  out,  his  countrymen  giving  him  no  rest.  Their 
attention  had  been  greatly  excited  by  the  great 
doctrines  (then  first  plainly  set  before  them)  of  the 
Redemption,  the  Resurrection  to  Eternal  Life,  &c., 
and  when  we  were  departing,  they  made  an  earnest 
request  at  the  water-side  that  he,  at  least,  might  be 
be  left  to  satisfy  their  craving  for  Christian  know- 
ledge. 

AVe  found  the  Demerara  much  swollen  on  our 
return.  Heavy  squalls  of  wind  and  rain  had  pro- 
fusely covered  its  waters  with  the  bright  yellow 
blossoms  of  the  moroji,  or  cork-wood  tree.  Few  sights 
are  more  beautiful  than  the  river  when  those  trees  are 
in  full  bloom,  especially  while  the  rays  of  the  setting 
sun  are  falling  on  those  which  stud  its  banks,  and, 
glancing  across  the  flower-besprinkled  waters,  cause 
them  to  resemble  a  stream  of  molten  gold. 

To  leave  the  landing-place  at  the  edge  of  the 
falls  had  been  a  delicate  operation,  and  to  re-enter 


ABOVE  THE  FALLS.  XU 

it  was  perhaps  still  more  so.  "  Tiger"  by  common 
consent  had  been  deposed  from  his  position  in  the 
bow,  and  we  had  now  an  experienced  hand  there ; 
Avho,  as  the  rumbling  noise  of  the  cataract  increased, 
and  we  came  within  its  suction,  stood  up  warily  to 
reconnoitre ;  and  by  a  wave  of  the  hand,  or  a  quiet 
word,  regulated  our  course,  and  the  rate  of  head- 
way necessary  to  keep  the  frail  craft  under  command. 
At  a  certain  spot,  a  signal  was  given  ;  the  paddles 
all  plied  in  concert,  and  we  glided  out  of  the  cur- 
rent, and  down  over  a  small  ledge  or  fall  between 
two  rocks,  into  the  shady  recess.  This,  by  the 
swelling  of  the  river,  had  now  liecome  part  of  the  falls, 
the  water  rushing  through  it.  Our  crew  jumped 
overboard,  and  brought  us  safely  to  the  bank ;  but 
a  like  good  fortune  did  not  await  our  little  tender. 
She  was  swamped,  notwithstanding  her  "back-dam" 
of  clay ;  but  the  Indians  got  on  the  rocks,  and 
held  her  on  the  surface  till  her  lading  could  be  re- 
moved.— Civilized  man  would  make  a  landing-place 
farther  from  the  cataract. 

The  region  we  were  quitting  is  the  most  central 
part  of  our  province.  The  falls,  preventing  con- 
tinuous navigation,  have  cut  it  off  in  a  great  measure 
from  the  lower  regions.  Since  our  expedition  to  the 
Berbice  Acawoios,  it  had  remained  the  only  in- 
habited part  of  our  undisputed  territory  previously 
unvisited  by  Christian  missionary.  We  had  now 
seen  and  spoken  with  all  the  Waika-Acawoios,  save 
a  very  small  remnant  still  living  on  the  Atacopara, 
and    some    other   families    under    Kanaimapo,    whose 

z 


338  THE  INDIAN  TRIBEH  OF  OUT  AN  A. 

settlements  were,  he  told  us,  three  or  four  days' 
voyage  to  the  southward. 

Beyond  these  last,  the  land  between  the  Corentyn 
and  Essequibo  stretches  three  degrees  farther  south. 
It  gradually  narrows  between  the  upper  courses  of 
those  two  rivers  to  a  width  of  little  more  than 
thirty  miles,  and  can  scarcely  be  called  inhabited. 

The  Caribs,  once  dominant  on  both  those  rivers, 
laid  waste  that  land  in  former  days.  The  Upper 
Demerara  especially  was  completely  swept  by  them 
of  its  ancient  inhabitants,  until  the  Acawoios  (a  horde 
from  the  Masaruni)  took  possession  of  the  vacant 
territory,  and,  allying  themselves  with  the  Araw^ks 
below,  were  able  to  hold  it  against  all  comers. 
Such  is  their  tradition.  The  Caribs  have  now  in 
their  turn  almost  disappeared  from  the  Upper 
Essequibo. 

Near  the  distant  sources  of  the  latter  river  dwell 
two  feeble  tribes, — the  Tarumas  and  Woyawais. 

The  Tarumas  once  lived  in  a  very  remote  region 
near  the  mouth  of  the  Rio  Negro.  There  the  Car- 
melites had  a  mission  among  them  as  early  as  1670. 
Disagreeing  with  other  tribes,  and  being  ill-used  by 
the  Portuguese,  a  portion  of  them  fled  northward. 
Death  made  such  ravages  among  those  who  re- 
mained that  their  race  was  considered  extinct : — but 
those  who  fled  had  settled  near  the  head  of  the 
Essequibo. 

Mahanarva,  the  famous  Caribi  chief,  ^  brought  the 

^  Mahanarva  had  one  of  his  numerous  residences  on  the  Upper 
Essequibo,  but  after  his  death  his  people,  diminished  in  numbers, 


ABOVE  THE  FALLS.  339 

first  information  of  their  existence  to  Demerara.  He 
described  them,  however,  as  amphibious,  and  taking 
shelter  in  caverns  under  water, —  an  exaggeration,  it 
is  probable,  of  their  timidity  and  rapid  disappearance 
by  di^ang  among  rocks  when  surprised  on  the  river 
by  his  man-stealing  countrymen. 

When  Schomburgk  departed  from  Pirara  Mission 
on  his  great  exploring  journey  to  Roraima,  and  to 
Esmeralda  on  the  Orinoco,  he  left  the  Eev.  Mr.  Youd 
preparing  to  start  the  same  day  on  an  expedition 
to  the  Tarumas.  The  missionary's  hopes  among  that 
tribe  soon  after  perished  in  his  own  expulsion. 

The  WoYAWAis  are  chiefly  noted  for  a  fine  breed 
of  dogs,  with  which  they  carry  on  a  traffic  with  other 
tribes  ;  and  for  their  filthy  habits. 

This  last-named  tribe  dwell  on  the  skirts  of  the 
Sierra  Acarai.  Ofi'-shoots,  or  continuations  of  that 
mountain-range,  run  in  a  north-easterly  direction 
towards  the  Atlantic.  From  the  northern  slopes  of 
that  water-shed  flow  the  chief  rivers  of  Surinam  and 
Cayenne.  Others  flow  southward  through  the  old 
Portuguese  Guiana  into    the   Amazon.     Of  the  wild 

abandoned  that  part  of  the  river.  The  serious  obstruction  to  its 
navigation  presented  by  the  cataract  (since  named  by  Schomburgk 
after  King  William  IV.)  was  probably  one  chief  cause  of  their 
removal. 

"At  that  fall,  conical  hills  of  granitic  structure,  covered  with 
verdure,  narrow  the  river  to  within  50  yards.  The  whole  body  of 
water  then  dashes  do^vn  a  precipice  of  14  feet,  then  foams  over  a 
rugged  bed  of  rocks  for  20  yards,  and  again  precipitates  itself  10 
feet  into  the  basin  below."  It  is  a  picturesque  fall,  but  by  no 
means  to  be  compared  to  those  of  the  Corentyn. 

z  2 


340  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

tribes    inhabiting    the   heads   of   those   latter  streams 
little  is  known.' 

^  The  Indian  races  inhabiting  the  Lower  Amazon  and  its 
tributaries  have  been  baptized,  and  are  in  various  degrees  of 
civilization.  They  are  now  generally  called  Tapuyos,  from  a 
nation  of  that  name,  very  powerful  on  the  coast  of  Brazil  in 
former  days,  which  is  said  to  have  been  driven  northward  by 
hordes  from  the  interior  more  fierce  and  savage  than  itself 

Of  the  ferocity  of  some  of  the  latter  terrible  accounts  have  been 
handed  down.  They  have  been  represented  as  devouring  every 
prisoner  they  could  capture,  as  a  sacred  duty,  and  a  sacrifice 
acceptable  to  the  manes  of  their  fallen  brethren.  They  are  also 
said  to  have  practised  a  refined  cruelty  similar  to  that  of  the 
Aztecs  of  ancient  Mexico,  in  cherishing  and  fattening  their  victim, 
giving  him  wives,  &c.,  until  an  appointed  day,  when,  after  many 
tedious  and  revolting  ceremonies,  in  which  old  women  were  chief 
actors,  he  was  put  to  death, — not,  however,  with  the  prolonged 
tortures  inflicted  by  the  N'orth  American  tribes,  but  by  a  single 
blow  of  a  sacred  club.  The  offspring  of  such  captives,  without 
regard  to  the  mother's  feelings,  are  said  to  have  been  inexorably 
reared  for  a  similar  fate. 

The  ancient  Tapuyos  are  reported  to  have  been  less  cruel,  sparing 
their  captives'  lives,  and  selling  them  for  slaves.  A  strange 
custom  of  eating  a  portion  of  their  dead  relatives,  as  the  last 
mark  of  affection,  is  said,  however,  to  have  existed  among  them 
in  their  former  wild  condition. 

]\Iany  of  those  Brazilian  tribes  were  reclaimed  from  their  bar- 
barous practices  by  the  missionaries  of  the  seventeenth  and 
eighteenth  centuries.  From  their  numerous  dialects  the  Jesuits 
selected  the  Tupi-Guarani,  or  Lingua  Geral,  and  made  it  the  com- 
mon language  of  their  missions,  which  up  to  the  middle  of  the 
last  century  flourished  greatly.  Soon  after  that  period  their  order 
lost  its  widely-extended  power,  and,  as  elsewhere,  the  missions 
declined. 

The  Indians  who  reside  in  the  more  central  districts  of  Brazil 
are  specially  protected  by  law.  But  of  the  remoter  tribes,  who 
prefer  an  independent  life,  the  milder  races  have  been  oppressed 
and  hunted  down  by  unscrupulous  traders  and  others ;  while  some 


ABOVE  THE  FALLS.  341 

The  Parima,  or  Rio  Branco,  which,  flowing  south- 
ward, joins  the  Rio  Negro  on  its  way  to  tlie  Amazon, 
has  its  rise  in  that  more  northern  chain  which  divides 
Brazil  from  VenezueLa.  Some  Paramiina  Indians  from 
the  banks  of  the  Parima  w^ere  the  guests  of  Kanaimapo 
at  the  time  of  our  visit,  and  descended  the  Demerara 
with  us.  They  were  distinguished  from  the  Acawoios, 
their  hosts,  by  very  hirge  feathered  coronals,  having 
soft  white  plumes  which  drooped  over  their  l)ro\\'s. 

Between  the  Rio  Branco  and  the  Essequibo  is  the 
country  of  the  Macusis,  Wapisianas,  and  Atorais. 
There  also  is  the  ruined  site  of  Pirara,  tlie  scene  in 
former  years  of  our  Church's  peaceful  ]\Iission,  and 
of  the  labours,  too  soon  destroyed,  of  a  good  soldier 
of  the  Cross.  From  the  highest  point  we  reached  on 
the  Demerara,  that  spot  lay  distant,  in  a  direct  line, 
about   100  miles. 

We  thouoht  on  its  fate  with  sadness.  Yet  there 
was  comfort  in  reflecting  on  the  noble  effort  then 
made,  and  in  the  knowledge  that  if,  like  Gideon's 
fleece,  that  region  now  lay  dry,  the  gracious  dew 
was  widely  falling  on  the  aborigines  elsewhere. 

The  Indians  of  that  clisj)uted  territory  have  not 
been  a  happy  people.  Schomburgk  witnessed  and 
described  the  descimentos  with  which  the  Brazilians 
have  wasted  their  villages.  In  addition,  they  have 
been  frequently  attacked  by  the  mountain-tribes. 

Insecurit)^  of  life  and  personal  freedom  lias  caused 

savage  nations,  who  are  said  to  retain  all  the  ferocity  and  canni- 
balism of  their  forefathers,  resolutely  defend  their  territories,  and 
allow  no  strangers  to  enter  them. 


342  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

many  families  of  Indians  to  quit  those  border-lands 
for  the  comparative  security  afforded  by  the  vicinity  of 
our  settlements.  Some  of  them  have  come  overland 
to  the  Demerara,  and  received  Christian  instruction 
there.  We  saw  proof  of  this  during  the  expedition 
described  in  this  chapter.  Among  fifty  Indians  of 
all  ages,  whom  we  then  baptized  in  the  chapels  of 
the  Mission  district  below  the  falls,  were  several  from 
the  west,  of  the  Macusi  and  Arecuna  nations. — Others 
have  descended  to  the  missions  of  the  Lower  Esse- 
quibo. — And  when  Serrawyk,  the  aged  chief  of  the 
Acawoios  of  Cuyuni,  after  four  fatiguing  journeys 
for  instruction  at  Waramuri  Mission,  was  baptized 
there  in  November  1866,  I  found  among  his  followers 
several  Macusis,  refugees  from  Pirara.  In  this  way 
the  baffled  "  fierceness  of  man "  sometimes  turns  to 
the  "  praise  of  God." 


CHAPTER  IX. 

THE    CHARACTER,    HABITS,    AND    SUPERSTITIONS    OF    THE 

INDIANS. 

Their  Indolence,  Apathy,  Acute  Observation,  &c. — Hospitality — 
Drunkenness — Polygamy — Superstitions  — The  Kanaima — Yau- 
hahu  or  Demons — System  of  Sorcery  or  Piai-ism — The  Orchu 
— Her  Qualities,  &c. 

From  the  foregoing  pages  some  idea  will  have  been 
formed  of  the  condition  of  the  various  Indian  races. 
The  points  on  which  they  differ  have  been  briefly 
stated,  but  there  are  some  things  in  which  they 
mostly  agree  which  may  require  further  notice. 

Indolence  is  one  of  these.  The  chief  desire  of  the 
Indian  in  his  uncivilized  condition  is  to  get  through 
life  with  as  little  trouble  as  possible.  They  are  ener- 
getic only  by  fits  and  starts ;  and  as  the  climate 
renders  clothing  unnecessary,  they  have  little  to  pro- 
vide for  beyond  their  daily  food,  and  spend  hours 
in  their  hammocks,  picking  their  teeth,  examining 
their  features  in  a  piece  of  looking-glass,  or  meditating 
some  new  and  striking  pattern  in  daubing  their  faces 
with  arnotto.  At  other  times  they  may  be  seen 
eradicating  the  hairs  of  their  beards  and  eyebrows, 
in  the  room  of  which  latter  some  tribes  tattoo  lines 


344  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

according  to  their  own  ideas  of  beauty ; — the  corners 
of  the  mouth,  and  sometimes  the  cheeks,  being  also 
tattooed  in  various  patterns.  The  women  work  con- 
tinuously in  agricultural  and  domestic  duties,  and 
cannot  justly  be  called  idle. 

The  apathj  of  their  race  is  also  noted.  Much  of 
it  is  assumed,  however ;  he  who  lives  among  them 
will  find  that  their  feelings  are  stronger  than  is  gene- 
rally supposed,  but  they  possess  great  control  over 
them,  and  seldom  give  vent  to  them  in  the  presence 
of  strangers. 

The  senses  of  the  Indians  are  very  acute ;  their 
sight,  hearing,  and  sense  of  smell,  naturally  keen, 
being  sharpened  by  necessity  and  continual  exercise. 
They  are  peculiarly  fitted  for  following  game,  or 
tracking  an  enemy  through  the  forests  and  swamps. 
The  turn  of  a  leaf,  or  a  broken  twig,  is  examined 
with  minute  attention.  They  will  tell  how  many 
men,  women,  and  children  have  passed,  where  a 
stranger  could  only  see  faint  and  confused  marks 
on  the  path  before  him ;  and  from  the  appearance 
of  the  track,  and  the  state  of  the  weather,  will  tell 
within  a  little  the  time  that  has  elapsed  since  the 
foot-marks  were  made.  Frequently,  when  on  arriving 
at  a  settlement  I  have  been  disappointed  by  the 
absence  of  the  people,  1  have  seen  the  Indians  with 
me  examine  the  fire-place,  the  dust  on  the  utensils 
that  had  been  left,  and  the  various  paths  leading 
from  the  place,  from  which  they  w^ould  tell  when 
the  people  left  the  house  and  the  direction  in  which 
they  were  gone. 


INDIAN  CHARACTER  AND  HABITS.  345 

The  keen  eye  of  an  Indian  boy  once  (by  Divine 
Providence)  saved  me  from  the  bite  of  a  labaria.  I 
was  about  to  put  my  hand  into  a  box  of  loose  school 
papers,  when  the  lad  arrested  it,  crying  "Snake!" 
I  tried  in  vain  to  get  a  sight  of  the  snake,  but  he 
still  persisted  in  saying  it  was  there,  on  which  I 
overturned  the  box.  The  deadly  reptile  darted  about, 
seeking  a  way  of  escape,  but  being  in  a  school-room, 
was  easily  destroyed  by  the  Indian  boys  with  long 
sticks,  though,  as  may  be  supposed,  he  cleared  the 
apartment  at  first. 

Notwithstanding  the  indolence  and  apathy  with 
which  the  Indians  are  charged,  they  are  keen  observers 
of  natural  objects.  Though  utterly  unacquainted 
Tvdth  scientific  rules,  their  knowledge  of  medicinal  ^ 
and  poisonous  plants  shows  that  their  race  must 
have  studied  the  properties  of  the  vegetable  king- 
dom. They  are  also  perfectly  acquainted  with  the 
habits  of  the  animals,  birds,  reptiles,  and  insects 
whicli  inhabit  their  country,  and  will  sometimes 
point  out  facts  connected  with  them  which  are  little 
known  save  to  professed  naturalists.  An  Indian  girl 
in  our  service  called  the  attention  of  her  mistress  to 
a  white  scorpion,  surrounded  by  bands  of  the  warrior, 
or  hunting  ants,  which  liad  taken  possession  of  the 
house,  and  were,  in  return,  destroying  all  the  vermin. 
The  scorpion  seemed  to  have  seven  loose  scales  on 
her  back,  which  the  Indian  girl  said  were  her  young 

^  ;More  than  14:0  medicinal  barks,  &c.,  used  by  the  Indians  in 
the  vicinity  of  our  missions,  and  collected  by  Mr.  M'Clintock,  were 
forwarded  to  the  London  International  Exhibition  in  1862. 


346  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

ones.  It  was  so,  and  the  parent  with  outstretched 
claws  was  brandishing  her  venomous  tail  as  she 
hurried  on,  in  the  vain  hope  of  preserving  their  lives, 
as  well  as  her  own,  from  the  attack  of  the  surround- 
ing ants.^ 

An  accurate  knowledge  of  the  nature  and  habits 
of  wild  animals  is  indispensable  to  men  whose  sub- 
sistence is  in  a  great  measure  derived  from  the  chase. 
The  Indian  hunter  possesses  it  in  perfection.     He  will 

^  Those  ants  paid  an  unusually  long  visit  on  that  occasion, 
staying  with  us  nearly  a  fortnight.  They  took  jjossession  of  an 
empty  box,  where  they  formed  themselves  into  a  mass  of  more 
than  two  cuhic  feet  in  size.  They  always  form  themselves  into 
such  a  mass  at  nightfall,  but  on  that  occasion  they  remained  day 
and  night  in  the  position  they  had  assumed.  Detachments  sallied 
out  from  those  head-quarters  every  morning  to  hunt,  taking  each 
room  in  succession ;  and  when  the  weather  was  dry,  apertures 
appeared  in  the  living  mass,  from  which  issued  streams  of  ants 
bearing  their  eggs  or  pupse,  which  are  nearly  as  large  as  them- 
selves, and  placing  them  in  the  sun.  They  brought  them  in  again 
when  damp  or  night  came  on.  They  did  not  molest  us  in  the 
least,  but  destroyed  the  vermin  in  each  room  in  succession,  and 
seemed  to  have  made  their  temporary  sojourn  for  the  purpose 
of  rearing  their  young,  for  when  they  quitted  their  retreat  the 
bottom  of  the  box  was  found  to  be  covered  with  their  white  skins 
or  cocoons.  They  probably  have  no  regular  nests,  but  avail  them- 
selves of  such  shelter  as  they  can  find.  Mr.  Bates,  who  attentively 
observed  the  habits  of  the  different  species  of  foraging  ants  on 
the  Amazon,  says,  "  I  never  met  with  a  hive ;  wherever  the 
Ecitons  were  seen  they  were  always  on  the  march." 

It  is  a  well-known  fact  that  those  ants  have  many  leaders 
or  captains,  whoi^e  heads  and  forceps  are  twice  as  large  as  those 
of  the  others,  who  appear  to  marshal  the  columns  on  the  march, 
and  direct  their  operations  in  a  style  that  would  delight  a  soldier 
to  witness.  I  have  seen  one  of  those  large-sized  warriors  pushing 
the  smaller  ones  through  a  chink  which  he  could  not  himself 
enter. 


INDIAN  CHARACTER  AND  HABITS.  347 

exactly  imitate  the  cry  of  various  birds  and  animals, 
and  shoot  them  when  he  has  thus  brouo-ht  them 
within  reach  of  his  gun,  arrow,  or  blow-pipe.  He 
then  hastens  home,  casts  the  game  before  his  wife, 
and  reposes  in  his  hammock  till  she  has  cooked  it. 

Some  of  the  tribes  are  not  very  nice  about  the  way 
in  which  their  food  is  prepared.  The  Waraus  will 
merely  take  out  the  inside  of  a  fish,  and,  without 
washing,  cook  and  eat  it.  Indians  generally  are  per- 
fectly ignorant  of  our  domestic  arrangements.  Having, 
in  an  emergency,  employed  an  Indian  girl  to  cook 
some  fish,  we  afterwards  made  the  unpleasant  dis- 
covery that  she  had  boiled  it  in  the  tea-kettle. 

They  are  strict  observers  of  hospitality.  When  a 
stranger  enters  the  dwelling  of  an  Indian,  he  is  sure 
of  being  entertained  by  him  with  the  best  at  his 
command.  Food  will  be  set  before  him,  the  kasiri 
drink  presented,  if  paiwari  be  wanting,  and  every 
kindness  shown,  if  his  conduct  be  civil  and  decent. 
It  is  true  that  the  Indian  looks  on  hiiiiself  as  entitled 
to  a  similar  reception,  but  that  is  no  more  than  just. 

They  are  fond  of  ixiying  visits  to  their  friends  in 
distant  parts  of  the  countr}'-.  In  clearing  the  forest, 
and  planting  their  fields,  they  calculate  upon  pro- 
visions for  twelve  months.  They  will  probably  be 
absent  for  three  months  of  the  year  on  visits  to  their 
friends,  but  nothing  is  gained  thereby,  as  their  friends 
are  sure  to  pay  them  a  \'isit  in  return.  In  this  manner 
the  distant  families  preserve  a  connexion  with  each 
other,  and  maintain  an  extensive  knowledge  of  the 
country. 


348  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

They  cannot,  generally  speaking,  be  commended 
for  punctualitij.  An  Indian  may  promise  to  come 
to  you  next  week,  but  a  very  slight  cause  will  induce 
him  to  put  off  his  visit  for  one  month,  or  even  for 
three.  Time  is  with  them  a  matter  of  no  considera- 
tion, though  so  valuable  to  us.  But  when  a  case 
occurs  which  imperatively  demands  punctuality,  as 
when  a  son  leaves  his  aged  and  dependent  parents 
to  go  on  a  journey,  he  will  give  them  a  string  with 
a  number  of  knots  in  it,  one  of  which  is  to  be  untied 
every  morning,  and  he  will  arrive,  if  well,  on  the 
day  on  which  the  last  is  untied.  I  have  seen  an 
aged  couple  regarding  with  great  solicitude  the  knots 
on  a  cord  thus  left  by  their  only  son. 

Theft  is  unusual  among  the  Indians.  They  leave 
their  open  houses,  with  several  articles,  valuable  or 
useful  to  them,  merely  suspended  out  of  the  reach 
of  destructive  animals ;  but  seldom  indeed  is  any- 
thing stolen  during  their  absence.  When  any  such 
depredation  does  occur,  the  Indian  thinks  that  the 
missing  article  has  been  carried  off  by  people  of  some 
other  race  than  his  own. 

The  love  of  liberty  is  deeply  implanted  in  the 
Indian  bosom,  and  no  people  on  earth  are  more  in- 
dependent in  their  way  of  life.  Each  man  selects 
the  site  for  his  own  dwelling,  which  he  builds  him- 
self, and  also  makes  most  of  the  implements  required 
for  hunting  and  fishing.  They  love  the  excitement  of 
the  chase,  though  it  does  not  always  fully  supply 
their  wants,  and  the  successful  hunter  throws  him- 
self into  his  hammock,  takes  his  repc^se,  and  enjoys 


lyniAN  CHARACTER  AND  HABITS.  340 

himself,  without  any  concern  for  the  artificial  comforts 
which  we  have  learned  to  value,  and  unmindful  of 
the  wants  of  the  morrow. 

We  must  now  consider  some  other  points  of  the 
Indian  character  and  habits. 

Their  drunkenness  has  been  already  noticed.  They 
are  not  addicted  to  the  systematic  dram-drinking 
practised  by  so  many  among  ourselves,  but  to  fearful 
excess  at  intervals.  When  they  have  tasted  the  in- 
toxicating draught  they  seem  incapable  of  moderation. 
Most  of  their  quarrels  spring  from  this  cause,  as  they 
then  become  violent  and  overbearing.  When  the 
Indian  is  intoxicated,  the  causes  of  offence  which  he 
may  fancy  he  has  against  his  wife  come  into  his 
mind,  and,  in  the  manner  of  our  own  brutal  sots, 
he  will  then  give  her  a  severe  beating. 

Allusion  has  been  made  to  the  dances  of  the 
Indians,  and  the  Maquarri  and  Owiarri  dances  of 
the  Arawaks  have  been  already  described.  In  these 
there  is  order,  and  a  certain  degree  of  gracefulness^ 
but  the  general  dance  of  the  Indians,  if  it  can  be 
called  such,  consists  chiefly  in  stamping  on  the 
ground,  balancing  on  one  foot,  and  staggering  in 
different  attitudes  as  if  intoxicated.  And  "  well  the 
music  with  the  dancing  suits  I "  l^eing  painfully 
monotonous  and  dismal. 

There  is  also  a  kind  of  lorestling,  or  trial  of 
strength,  practised  by  the  Waraus  at  their  drinking- 
bouts,  in  which  each  of  the  antagonists  is  furnished 
with  a  sort  of  shield  made  of  the  light  branches  of 
the    ita,    cut    into    equal    lengths,    and    firmly   lashed 


350  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

across  a  frame  tliree  or  four  feet  in  height,  but  some- 
what less  in  width,  and  slightly  bending  outwards. 
The  front  of  each  shield  is  painted  in  various  colours, 
and  with  some  peculiar  device,  according  to  the  fancy 
of  the  owner.  From  its  upper  edge  arise  elastic  stems, 
generally  three  in  number,  adorned  with  coloured 
tassels,  and  surmounted  with  streamers  made  of 
the  same  material  as  the  maquarri  whips,  and  not 
much  unlike  them.  It  has  altogether  a  picturesque 
appearance. 

Each  champion  grasps  the  edges  of  his  shield  firmly 
with  both  hands,  and  after  various  feints  and  grimaces 
to  throw  his  opponent  off  his  guard  a  clash  is  heard, 
as  one  springs  forward  and  his  shield  strikes  that  of 
his  antagonist.  The  contest  is  generally  one  of  mere 
strength,  the  shield  being  pushed  forward  by  the 
whole  force  of  the  body,  and  supported  by  one  knee, 
while  the  other  leg  is  extended  firmly  behind.  Some- 
times one  of  the  players  is  able  to  push  the  other  ofi" 
the  ground,  or  by  a  dexterous  slip  and  thrust  on  the 
flank,  sends  him  rolling  on  the  sand  ;  but  more  fre- 
quently they  remain  pressing,  panting,  and  struggling, 
until  exhausted,  when  the  contest  ceases  by  mutual 
consent.  It  is  then  a  point  of  Warau  etiquette  to 
shake  the  shields  at  each  other  in  a  jeering  manner, 
and  with  a  tremulous  motion  of  their  elastic  orna- 
ments, and  to  utter  a  very  peculiar  and  ridiculously 
defiant  sound,  something  like  the  whinnying  of  a 
young  horse.  This  is  generally  followed  by  a  hearty 
good-humoured  laugh,  in  which  the  bystanders  join. 
Another  couple  then  step  forward  to  engage. 


W; 


'^-\ 


%■"'  :^•:•^'f  l'T'\^ N^'"^:    'f^^^  \    -  - 


INDIAN  CHARACTER  AND  HABITS.  351 

This  contest  is  called  by  the  Waraus,  from  the 
name  of  the  shield,  "  Isahi." 

Polygamy  has  been  mentioned  as  the  great  bane 
of  Indian  domestic  life.  They  live  in  comfort  as 
long  as  the  man  is  content  with  one  wife,  and  in- 
stances of  conjugal  attachment  are  very  frequent. 
But  as  the  heathen  Indian  is  allowed  to  take  as 
many  wives  as  he  wishes  for,  or  can  maintain,  we 
frequently  find,  among  some  tribes,  men  possessed 
of  more  wives  than  one.  They  regard  this  as  a 
mark  of  greatness. 

A  well-known  Warau,  named  Tamenawari,  was 
pointed  out  to  me  in  1840  as  having  nine  wives. 
He  was  reported  to  be  very  jealous,  and  to  have 
shot  one  and  cut  through  the  arm  of  another  with 
a  cutlass.  A  settler  in  our  neighbourhood  taxed  him 
with  these  crimes,  and  threatened  to  apprehend  him. 
Tamenawari  immediately  complained  of  sickness,  and 
took  to  his  hammock,  where  I  saw  him  ;  but  the  next 
morning  he  and  his  wives  were  met  forty  m-ilcs  away, 
the  whole  establishment  paddling  as  if  for  their  lives, 
having  decamped  when  night  came  on  with  all  pos- 
sible celerity  and  silence.  About  four  years  after  he 
came  to  the  Mission,  and  attended  Divine  Service. 
He  was  mucb  altered  in  his  looks,  and  on  my 
inquiring  after  his  wives,  who  did  not  appear, 
he  said,  pathetically,  that  he  had  "  not  one  left ! 
that  they  had  all  deserted  him  during  a  long  and 
dancrerous  illness,  and  that  he  then  lived  with 
his  son."  His  countrymen  laughed  at  his  domestic 
sorrows. 


352  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

Some  years  after  I  passed,  on  the  sea,  a  canoe,  in 
which  were  a  number  of  Waraii  women  and  children 
with  naked  skins  and  dishevelled  hair,  paddling  one 
man,  who,  looking  as  dignified  in  a  very  tall  (and  once 
black)  hat  as  its  battered  and  broken-brimmed  con- 
dition would  allow,  was  seated  behind  and  steerino: 
at  his  ease.  This,  my  crew  told  me,  Avas  the  son  of 
Tamenawari,  and  his  domestic  establishment.  Un- 
willing to  profit  by  his  father's  woes,  he  was  doing 
his  best  to  imitate  him  in  the  number  of  his  wives. 

It  is  not  an  uncommon  thing  to  see  an  Indian, 
who  has  already  a  wife  and  family  of  young  children, 
bringing  up  a  little  girl  who  will  become  his  second 
wife.  In  a  few  years  this  odious  process  is  repeated. 
The  unhappiness  attendant  on  this  practice  must  be 
manifest  to  all,  as  the  first  wife  will  not  always 
tamely  submit ;  for  though  in  a  degraded  condition, 
the  natural  feelings  of  woman  rebel  at  such  cruel 
treatment,  and  jealousy  and  unhappiness  have,  in 
repeated  instances,  led  to  suicide. 

Sometimes  a  struggle  against  polygamy  takes  place. 
I  knew  of  one  in  which  the  injured  first  wife  came 
ofi"  victorious.  Three  Arawak  sisters  lived,  with  their 
respective  husbands,  at  one  settlement.  The  husband 
,  of  the  eldest,  having  been  on  a  visit  to  some  friends, 
was  induced  by  them  to  take  a  second  wife,  a  young 
but  full-grown  woman.  When  he  brought  her  home, 
the  first  wife  (who,  having  heard  of  it,  had  attempted 
to  hang  herself,  and  was  desperate)  commenced  an 
assault  on  her,  supported  by  her  two  sisters,  whose 
husbands    looked    quietly    on — probably    learning    a 


IXDIAX  CIIABACTEE  AXD  HABITS.  3.);] 

lesson  for  themselves.  Against  such  odtls  it  was  use- 
less to  contend.  After  paddling  the  strange  woman 
back  to  her  friends,  the  transo-ressino;  husband  re- 
turned  to  his  first  wife  and  the  ciiildren  she  had 
borne  him, — a  wiser  if  not  a  better  man.  This  hap- 
pened the  year  before  the  introduction  of  Christianity 
amono;  them. 

The  Caribs  were  often  fallino-  out  about  their  wives, 
polygamy  being  very  prevalent  among  them. 

The  male  relations  of  the  women  would  sometimes 
demand  payment  ^  before  they  would  consent  to  give 
them  in  marriage,  even  when  the  woman  was  a  widow, 
and  no  longer  very  young.  I  knew  two  instances  in 
which  the  parties  were  obliged  to  fly  to  avoid  the 
consequences  of  a  stolen  match.  One  of  the  men 
told  me  that  he  narrowly  escaped  having  his  head 
cleft  by  a  blow  from  the  brother  of  the  woman,  a 
widow  of  middle  age,  whom,  with  her  own  consent 
he  had  taken. 

The  Carib  woman  is  always  in  bondage  to  her  male 
relations.  To  her  father,  brother,  or  husband  she  is 
ever  a  slave,  and  seldom  has  any  power  in  the  dis- 
posal of  herself.  Her  family  claim  authority  over  her 
even  after  they  have  given  her  in  marriage.  The 
whole  domestic  system  of  that  tribe  is  l)ad.  The 
following    instance    will    show,    in    some    degree,    its 

^  Among  the  Macusis  in  the  distant  interior  the  custom  of 
selling  each  other,  even  near  relatives,  prevails ;  and  it  has  been 
said  that  "  when  a  man  dies  his  wife  and  children  are  at  the 
disposal  of  his  eldest  surviving  brother,  who  may  sell  or  kill  them 
at  pleasure." — Dr.  Hancock. 

A    A 


354  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

working,  and  the  extent  to  which  those  painted  pro- 
prietors of  women  can  carry  their  rights  of  ownership. 

A  high-spii'ited  Caribi  girl,  indignant  at  being  given 
in  marriage  to  an  elderly  man,  who  had  already  other 
wives  (one  being  her  own  sister),  ran  away  from  him 
and  bestowed  her  hand  on  one  of  the  Essequibo  Caril)s, 
u  younger  man  whom  she  liked  better.  After  a  while  the 
old  man  visited  that  quarter, — not  however  to  exercise 
his  unquestioned  right  to  bring  her  back  and  beat  her, 
— but  to  claim  compensation  for  the  loss  of  her  services. 
It  was  willingly  allowed  ;  and  for  a  gun,  a  barrel  of  salt, 
or  some  article  of  like  value,  the  woman  was  left  with 
the  man  of  her  choice,  who  perhaps  thought  himself 
secure,  and  the  business  well  ended.  But  the  next 
year  the  old  man,  who  well  knew  what  he  was  doing, 
paid  them  another  visit,  still,  as  he  said,  in  quest  of 
compensation.  On  being  reminded  by  the  husband 
that  he  had  already  been  paid  for  the  woman,  he 
replied,  "  Yes, — for  the  woman  ;  but  she  has  since 
borne  you  a  child, — you  must  now  pay  me  for  that." 
The  unwritten  law  of  Caribi  usage  was  decidedly  in 
the  old  man's  favour,  and  he  received  compensation 
for  that  child.  For  each  succeeding  birth  he  could, 
if  he  chose,  reappear,  like  an  unquiet  spirit,  make  a 
similar  demand,  and  be  supported  therein  by  the 
custom  of  his  nation. 

There  arc  many  strangely  suj^erstitious  customs 
observed  by  the  Indians.  Some  of  them  connected 
with  the  births  of  their  children  may  perhaps 
provoke  a  smile  from  the  reader. 

We  have  already  noticed  that  most  absurd  custom 


INDIAN  SUPERSTITIONS.  355 

whicli  compels  the  husband  to  share  his  wife's  con- 
finement by  lying  in  his  hammock  and  pretending 
sickness,  and  the  ridiculous  attentions  with  which  he 
is  nursed  by  the  women  when  in  that  very  unplea- 
sant condition.  This  I  had  myself  witnessed.  But 
as  many  years  had  elapsed  without  our  meeting  a 
similar  instance,  we  thought  the  custom  had  disap- 
peared under  the  combined  influence  of  reason  and 
ridicule.  It  revived,  however,  with  the  influx  of 
strangers,  and  a  young  Christian  Indian  was  so  impor- 
tuned by  his  female  relatives  to  comply  with  it,  that 
he  left  his  wife  and  new-born  babe,  and,  to  escape 
the  annoyance,  went  to  work  at  a  distance  for  three 
weeks.  At  the  end  of  that  time  he  thought  he 
might  fairly  be  considered  convalescent,  even  by  the 
old  women,  and  returned  to  his  home. 

Some  of  the  men  of  the  Acawoio  and  Caribi  nations, 
when  they  have  reason  to  expect  an  increase  of  their 
families,  consider  themselves  bound  to  abstain  from 
certain  kinds  of  meat,  lest  the  expected  child  should, 
in  some  very  mysterious  way,  be  injured  by  their 
partaking  of  it.  The  Acouri  (or  Agouti)  is  thus 
tabooed,  lest,  like  that  little  animal,  the  child  should 
be  meagre ; — the  Haimara,  also,  lest  it  should  be 
blind — the  outer  coating  of  the  eye  of  that  fish  sug- 
gesting film  or  cataract ; — the  Lahha,  lest  the  infant's 
mouth  should  protrude  like  the  labba's,  or  lest  it  be 
spotted  like  the  labba,  which  spots  would  ultimately 
become  ulcers.  The  Marudi  is  also  forbidden,  lest 
the  infant  be  still-born,  the  screeching  of  that  bird 
being;  considered  ominous  of  death. 

A    A    2 


356  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

"  Both  the  above  tribes  and  the  Waraus  consider  it 
their  duty  to  abstain  from  venison  after  their  wives 
are  confined,  lest  the  child  on  arriving  at  manhood 
be  found  wanting  in  speed,  exemplified  by  the  slow 
pace  which  the  female  deer,  when  she  has  a  young 
fawn  at  her  feet,  is  obliged  to  observe." 

Such  are  some  of  the  dietetic  rules  laid  down  for 
the  men  by  their  system  of  superstition.  They 
are  probably  observed  by  very  few  in  their  full 
rigour,  for  the  forbidden  animals  form  a  large  pro- 
portioji  of  the  Indian's  bill  of  fare  as  found  in  the 
forests,  and  a  Carib  or  other  polygamist  with  three 
or  four  wives  might  be  debarred  from  tasting  them 
during  the  whole,  or  the  best  period,  of  his  manhood. 

Mr.  M'Clintock,  to  whose  exact  research  I  am 
indebted  for  the  above  list  of  things  forbidden,  has 
also  investigated  the  customs  of  the  wilder  tribes 
with  respect  to  burial.  He  says  that  the  Kapohn 
or  Acawoio  races  (those  who  have  embraced  Chris- 
tianity excepted)  like  to  bury  their  dead  in  a  standing 
posture,  assigning  this  reason, — "  Although  my  brother 
be  in  appearance  dead,  he  [i  e.  his  soul)  is  still  alive." 
Therefore,  to  maintain  by  an  outward  sign  this  belief 
in  immortality,  some  of  them  bury  their  dead  erect, 
which  they  say  represents  life,  whereas  lying  down 
represents  death.  Others  bury  their  dead  in  a  sitting 
posture,  assigning  the  same  reason. 

AVhen  the  death  of  any  member  of  that  tribe  is 
supposed  to  have  been  brought  about  by  unfair  means, 
the  knife  of  the  deceased  is  buried  with  him,  with 
the    horrid    idea    that    he    may    have    the    means    of 


INDIAN  S UPHRSTITIONS.  3 .)  7 

avenging  himself  in  the  world  of  spirits.  The 
Waraiis,  in  similar  circumstances,  place  a  bow  and 
arrows  by  the  side  of  the  dead  man,  that  he  may 
by  means  of  those  weapons  keep  off  malignant 
spirits  in  his  passage  to  the  other  world. 

We  come  now  to  the  worst  feature  in  the  character 
of  the  Indians  of  Guiana, — their  'proneness  to  hlood- 
revenge, — by  which  a  succession  of  retaliatory  murders 
may  be  kept  up  for  a  long  time.  It  is  closely  con- 
nected with  their  system  of  sorcery,  Avhich  we  shall 
presently  consider. 

A  person  dies, — and  it  is  suj)posed  that  an  enemy 
has  secured  the  agency  of  an  evil  spirit  to  compass 
his  death.  Some  sorcerer,  employed  by  the  friends 
of  the  deceased  for  that  purpose,  pretends  by  his 
incantations  to  discover  the  guilty  individual  or 
family,  or  at  any  rate  to  indicate  the  cjuarter 
where  they  dwell.  A  near  relative  of  the  deceased 
is  then  charged  with  the  work  of  vengeance.  He 
becomes  a  "  Kanaima,"  or  is  supposed  to  be  possessed 
by  the  destroying  spirit  so  called,  and  has  to  live 
apart,  according  to  strict  rule,  and  submit  to  many 
privations,  until  the  deed  of  blood  be  accomplished. 
If  the  supposed  offender  cannot  be  slain,  some  inno- 
cent member  of  his  family — man,  woman,  or  little 
child— must  suffer  instead.  If  the  victim  cannot  be 
approached  with  safety  to  the  assassin,  he  may  be 
shot  from  behind,  and  buried  by  the  Kanaima  near 
the  spot  where  he  falls.  But  such  vengeance,  though 
allowed,  is  considered  imperfect,  the  manes  of  the 
deceased  being  supposed  to  demand  more  cruelty  in 


358  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUI  AN  J. 

the  appeasing  sacrifice.  So  the  victim,  where  it  can 
be  done,  is  approached  softly  from  behind  while  off 
his  guard,  and  struck  down  by  a  violent  blow  across 
the  neck.  While  he  lies  insensil)le  (according  to 
some  accounts)  his  throat  is  grasped,  and  the  fangs 
of  a  poisonous  serpent  are  thrust  through  his  tongue. 
Others  say  that  a  poisonous  powder  (prepared  in  the 
fcir  interior  from  the  strongest  kind  of  a  plant  called 
Urujia,^  and  which  the  Kanaima  carries  in  the  wing- 
bone  of  a  powis,  concealed  in  his  hair)  is  forced  into 
the  mouth.  Horrible  agony  and  inability  to  speak, 
followed  in  clue  course  by  death,  are  the  inevitable 
result.^ 

The  work  of  the  Kanaima  is  not  yet  ended.  If 
the  sufferer  be  found  by  his  friends  and  carried  home, 
the  perpetrator  of  the  deed  is  obliged  to  hover  near,  to 
discover  the  place  of  burial ;  as  he  cannot  be  released 
from  the  power  of  the  evil  spirit  which  possesses 
him  until  he  has  performed  certain  acts  to  the  victim's 
body.  What  those  acts  are  it  is  difficult  to  learn. 
Some  of  the  Indians  say  that  the  corpse  must  be 
disinterred  for  the  purpose,  but  the  statement  given 
by  the  Rev.  ]\Ir,  Bernau  in  his  excellent  account, 
derived  from  the  Essequibo  Indians,  seems  to  me 
more  probable.^     He  says  that  the  murderer  goes  to 

1  Mr.  M'Clintock. 

^  Some  of  our  Acawoios  have  told  lis  that  there  are  other 
poisonous  powders  used  by  the  Kanaimas  for  the  above  purpose, 
and  that  the  whole  system  is  taught  from  father  to  son  in  many 
families,  to  be  brought  into  use  against  their  enemies  as  occasion 
may  require. 

^  Bcrnau's  Missioiiari/  Labours,  p.  58. 


INDIAN  SUPERSTITIONS.  3  j9 

the  grave  on  the  third  riiglit  and  presses  a  j)ointcd 
stick  through  the  body,  that  he  may  taste  the  victim's 
blood. 

If  this,  which  is  an  offering  to  the  Kanaima 
spiiit  within  him,  be  accomplished,  he  becomes  like 
other  men,  and  can  return  to  his  family, — but  if  not, 
he  wanders  on  till  madness  or  some  other  dire  con- 
sequences, by  the  agency  of  the  disappointed  spirit, 
are  believed  to  come  upon  him.' 

The  family  of  his  victim  are,  of  course,  desirous 
that  the  corpse  should  not  be  desecrated,  and  that 
the  murderer  should  suffer.  To  insure  the  former, 
they  endeavour  to  bury  the  body  in  some  place  where 
the  Kanaima  may  not  find  it.  This  is  difficult,  for 
where  one  Indian  goes  another  can  track  him.  So 
to  make  certain  of  revenge,  if  the  grave  be  molested, 
some  will  open  the  body,  take  out  the  liver,  and  put 
a  red-hot  axe-head  into  its  place.     If,  after  that  be 

^  An  Indian,  reduced  almost  to  a  skeleton,  and  in  a  dreadful 
state  of  exhaustion,  was  picked  up  in  the  forest  by  some  Arawaks 
and  brought  to  the  Pomeroon  IMission.  He  liad  lost  a  portion  of 
his  scalp,  and  had  his  lower  lip  torn  down  at  each,  corner.  This, 
he  said,  had  been  done  by  a  small  "tiger,"  which  had  sprung  on 
him  while  lying  in  the  forest.  Those  wounds  were  in  a  most  loath- 
some condition.  The  Acawoios  at  the  mission,  whose  language  he 
spoke,  took  much  care  of  him  at  first,  but  afterwards  judged, 
from  his  refusing  certain  kinds  of  food  and  other  signs,  that 
he  was  a  devotee  and  victim  of  unappeased  Kanaima,  and  the 
murderer  of  a  man  killed  some  time  before.  From  lliis,  and 
his  savage  ungrateful  demeanour  (though  Mr.  M'Clintock,  aided 
by  myself,  cleansed  and  dressed  his  sores  to  encourage  them), 
we  had  some  difficulty  in  getting  him  nursed  till  his  strength 
had  returned,  as  they  feared  lest  they  should  become  his  future 
victims. 


360  THE  INDIAN  TRIBEti  OF  GUIANA. 

done,  the  Kanaima  disturb  tlie  corpse,  the  intense 
heat  which  was  in  tlie  axe-head  when  placed  there 
will  pass  into  his  body,  consume  his  vitals,  and  cause 
him  to  perish  miserably.     Such  is  their  belief. 

An  Acawoio  told  me  also  of  another  plan  that  is 
sometimes  followed.  A  small  quantity  of  the  ourali 
(or  worali)  poison  placed  on  the  dead  body  will  equally 
insure  the  death  of  the  murderer.  Should  he  return 
to  desecrate  the  remains,  the  venom  of  the  ourali 
will  j)ass  into  and  destroy  him. 

In  consequence  of  those  practices,  and  the  terror 
they  inspire,  the  Indians  of  the  interior  seldom  con- 
sider themselves  in  perfect  safety.  Those  near  the 
coast  will,  if  unfortunately  entangled  in  a  quarrel, 
apply  to  some  influential  person,  whose  agency  is 
generally  successful.  When  a  murder  of  the  above 
kind  is  committed  near  the  coast,  the  Kanaima  and 
victim  are  generally  both  from  the  interior. 

In  cases  of  secret  enmity  poison  is  sometimes  re- 
sorted to.  The  Indians  are  acquainted  with  various 
preparations,  both  vegetable  and  animal,^  which  may 

^  Venomous  serpents,  as  may  be  supposed,  are  used  in  their 
composition.  A  preparation,  for  instance,  from  a  certain  part 
of  the  inside  of  the  deadly  bush-master  snake,  mixed  with  a  little 
of  the  juice  of  the  bitter  cassava  (which  is  itself  poisonous), 
and  given  in  a  draught  of  i^aiwari,  is  said  to  cause  death  quickly, 
and  if  smoked  with  tobacco  to  be  more  slow,  but  equally  fatal, 
causing  the  throat  to  sAvell  for  days  till  death  ensues. 

The  above  was  privately  communicated  to  me,  with  a  caution  to 
myself  and  other  teachers  to  be  careful  of  giving  offence  to  the 
Indians  who  are  said  to  prepare  it.  Whether  its  effects  would  be 
as  above  stated  I  cannot  say,  having  happih'  known  no  instance 
of  its  UFe,   but  there  could  be  no  doubt  of  the  deadly  nature  of 


INDIA  N  SVFEBSTITI0N:<1.  3 G  1 

be  used  secretly  to  remove  an  obnoxious  person,  or 
to  avenge  a  real  or  supposed  injury. 

The  religious  belief  (if  it  can  be  called  such)  of 
the  Indian  in  his  natural  state  has  been  already 
noticed.  Ages  have  elapsed  since  his  ancestors 
neglected  to  walk  with,  serve,  or  woj-ship  God  ;  yet 
still  tradition  has  handed  down  a  Ijelief  in  the  ex- 
istence of  the  Supreme  Being,  which  the  oljservation 
of  nature  has  confirmed.     The  words  of  the  poet — 

"Lo!  the  poor  Indian,  whose  untutor'd  mind 
Sees  God  in  clouds,  or  hears  llim  in  the  wind," 

are,  to  a  certain  extent,  true.  It  is  froui  the  con- 
vulsions and  phenomena  of  nature,  such  as  thunder 
and  lightning,  that  the  Indian  forms  his  idea  of  the 
power  of  God,  while  the  growth  of  his  cassava,  and 
the  other  provision  made  for  his  wants,  convince 
him  of  His  goodness.  Strange  it  is,  that  with  such 
ideas  of  the  Supreme  Being,  they  should  seek  to 
inferior  spirits,  and  those  of  a  malignant  nature,  to 
avert  calamity  I 

Of  those  beings,  according  to  their  belief,  there  are 
more  kinds  than  one.  The  yauhahu  and  orehu  of 
the  Arawaks  are  objects  of  faith  to  the  other  tribes, 
though  under  different  names. 

The  Yauhahu  are  the  beings  aj)plied  to  l)y  their 
sorcerers.  They  delight  in  inflictiug  miseries  on  man- 
kind. They  are  believed  to  be  unceasingly  active  in 
the  pursuit  of  e\dl,  and  tp  occasion  sickness  and  death. 
Pain  is  called,  in  the  poetical  idiom  of  the  Arawaks, 

the  intention  which  could  inspire  the  preparation  and  administra- 
tion of  such  a  dose. 


362  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

"  yaulialiu  simaira,"  the  evil  spirit's  arrow.  This 
is  its  general  name  among  them. 

While  the  Great  Creator,  having  formed  all  things, 
and  established  the  laws  of  nature,  is  believed  by  the 
Indians  to  exist  in  tranquil  Ijliss,  unaffected  by  the 
miseries  of  man  ;  the  afflictions  occasioned  by  the 
yauhahu  can  only  be  remedied  by  propitiating  the 
demons  themselves. 

The  evil  spirits  are  sup])osed  to  have  a  j)eculiar 
fondness  for  tobacco,  and  to  be  continually  inhaling 
its  fumes.  It  is  by  using  this  sacred  plant  that  their 
votaries  secure  their  aid. 

When  an  Indian  has  made  up  his  mind  to  become 
a  sorcerer,  or  "  doctor,"  he  applies  to  some  professor 
of  that  art,  who  takes  him  into  a  small  hut  prepared 
for  the  purpose.  After  certain  preliminaries,  including 
solitude  and  spare  diet,  a  quantity  of  water,  containing 
about  ten  leaves  of  cured  tobacco,  is  boiled  down  to 
about  a  fourth.  This  horribly  nauseous  and  emetic 
dose  he  must  swallow,  and,  in  the  death-like  state  of 
sickness  to  which  it  reduces  him,  his  spirit  is  supposed 
to  leave  the  body,  and  to  visit  and  receive  power 
from  the  yauhahu,  or  heho,  as  the  Waraus  call  the 
dreaded  beings  under  whose  influence  he  is  believed 
to   iTraain  ever  after. 

Meanwhile,  his  death  is  loudly  proclaimed,  and  his 
countrymen  called  to  witness  his  state.  Recovery 
is  slow,  and  al:)out  the  tenth  day  he  comes  forth  from 
the  sacred  hut  in  a  most  emaciated  condition.  For 
ten  months  after  the  new  sorcerer  must  abstain  from 
the  flesh   of  birds    and   l)easts,  and  only  the  smallest 


INDIAN  SUPERSTITIONS.  363 

kiiuls  of  fish  are  allowed  him.  Even  cassava  bread 
is  to  be  eaten  sparingly,  and  intoxicating  drinks 
avoided  during  that  period. 

Meats  and  food  not  indigenous  to  the  country  are 
especially  tabooed.  I  have  known  one  of  those 
men  refuse  to  pick  up  some  North  American  salt 
fish  which  had  fallen  on  the  ground,  lest  by  touch- 
ing it  he  should  neutralize  the  power  of  his  enchant- 
ments. And  among  the  Indian  paddlers  attached, 
under  Mr.  M'Clintock,  to  the  military  expedition  to 
Pirara,  was  one  who,  being  unable  to  procure  his 
set  diet,  was  obliged  to  eat  the  rations  served  out, 
or  starve.  He  preferred  the  former,  but  thereby 
lost  his  spiritual  power  and  influence,  his  country- 
men alleging  that  the  forbidden  food  had  "  spoiled 
his  mouth"  for  incantation.^ 

Those  sorcerers  are  usually  called  by  the  settlers 
"  piai  (or  pe-i-)  men."^ 

They  are  each  furnished  with  a  laiye  gourd  or 
calabash,  which  has  been  emptied  of  its  seeds  and 

^  Mr.  M'Clintock  states  that  "  the  above  rules  are  common  to 
the  Caribs  as  well  as  the  Waraus,  but  that  the  former  are  allowed 
during  their  period  of  abstinence  to  take  a  little  meat— the  flesh 
of  the  Acouri." 

"The  Acawoios  difier  in  some  respects  from  the  other  tribes, 
inasmuch  as  not  less  than  four,  and  frequently  more,  become 
M.D.'s  at  the  same  time.  Each  contributes  as  much  tobacco  as 
would  fill  both  hands,  and  this  is  boiled  down  to  a  quantity  which 
gives  about  half  a  pint  to  each  person,  a  beverage  stronger  than 
that  of  the  "Waraus,  but  less  in  quantity." 

2  From  the  Caribi  word  "  Puiai,"  which  denotes  their  profession. 
Tlie  Acawoios  call  it  "  jiiatsan,"  from  the  same  root ;  the  Arawaks, 
"  semecihi ;  "  and  the  Waraus,  "  wisidaa." 


364  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

spongy  contents,  and  lias  a.  round  stick  run  through 
the  middle  of  it  by  means  of  two  holes.  The  ends 
of  this  stick  project — one  forms  the  handle  of  the 
instrument,  and  the  other  has  a  long  string  to  which 
beautiful  feathers  are  attached,  wound  round  it  in 
spiral  circles.  AVithin  the  calabash  are  a  few  small 
white  stones,  which  rattle  when  it  is  shaken  or  turned 
round.  The  calabash  itself  is  usually  painted  red. 
It  is  regarded  with  great  awe  by  the  heathen  Indians, 
who  fear  to  touch  it,  or  even  to  approach  the  place 
where  it  is  kept. 

When  attacked  by  sickness,  the  Indians  cause 
themselves  to  be  conveyed  to  some  friendly  sorcerer, 
to  whom  a  present  of  more  or  less  value  must  be 
made.  Death  is  sometimes  occasioned  by  those  re- 
movals, cold  being  taken  from  wet  or  the  damp  of 
the  river.  If  the  patient  cannot  be  removed,  the 
sorcerer  is  sent  for  to  visit  him.  The  females  are 
all  sent  away  from  the  place,  and  the  men  must  keep 
at  a  respectful  distance,  as  he  does  not  like  his  pro- 
ceedings to  be  closely  inspected.  He  then  commences 
his  exorcisms,  turning  and  shaking  his  marakka,  or 
rattle,  and  chanting  an  address  to  the  yauhahu.  This 
is  continued  for  hours,  until  about  midnight  the 
spirit  is  supposed  to  be  present,  and  a  conversation 
to  take  place,  which  is  unintelligible  to  the  Indians 
who  may  overhear  it.  These  ceremonies  are  kept  up 
for  successive  nights. 

If  the  patient  be  strong  enough  to  endure  the 
disease,  the  excitement,  the  noise,  and  the  fumes  of 
tobacco  in  which   he   is  at  times  enveloped,   and   the 


INDIAN  superstition;:^.  :](')') 

sorcerer  observe  signs  of  recovery,  he  will  pretend  to 
extract  tlie  cause  of  the  complaint  by  sucking  the 
part  affected.  After  many  ceremonies  he  will  produce 
from  his  mouth  some  strange  substance,  such  as  a 
thorn  or  gravel-stone,  a  fish-bone  or  bird's  claw,  a 
snake's  tooth,  or  a  piece  of  wii*e,  wdiicli  some  malicious 
yauhahu  is  supposed  to  have  inserted  in  the  affected 
part.  As  soon  as  the  patient  fancies  himself  rid  of 
this  cause  of  his  illness  his  recovery  is  generally 
rapid,  and  the  fame  of  the  sorcerer  greatly  increased. 
Should  death,  however,  ensue,  the  blame  is  laid 
ujjon  the  evil  spirit  whose  power  and  malignity 
have  prevailed  over  the  counteracting  charms.  Some 
rival  sorcerer  will  at  times  come  in  for  a  share  of 
the  blame,  whom  the  sufferer  has  unhaj^pily  made 
his  enemy,  and  avIio  is  supposed  to  have  employed 
the  yauhahu  in  destroying  him.  The  sorcerers  being 
supposed  to  have  the  power  of  causing,  as  well  as 
of  curing  diseases,  are  much  dreaded  by  the  common 
people,  who  never  wilfully  offend  them.  So  deeply 
rooted  in  the  Indian's  bosom  is  this  belief  concernino; 
the  origin  of  diseases,  that  they  have  little  idea  of 
sickness  arising  from  other  causes.  Death  may  arise 
from  a  wound  or  a  contusion,  or  be  brought  on  by 
want  of  food,  but  in  other  cases  it  is  the  work  of 
the  yauhahu. 

I  once  came  upon  a  Warau  practising  his  art  upon 
a  woman  afflicted  with  a  severe  internal  complaint. 
He  was,  when  I  first  saw  him,  blowing  violently  into 
his  hands  and  rubbing  them  upon  the  affected  part. 
He  very  candidly  acknowledged  his  imposture  when 


366  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

I  taxed  him  with  it,  put  up  his  implemerits,  and  went 
away.  The  fate  of  the  poor  woman,  as  it  was  related 
to  me  some  time  afterwards,  was  very  sad.  Though 
a  Venezuelan  half-breed,  and  of  the  Church  of  Eome, 
she  was  wedded  to  the  Indian  superstitions,  and  after 
trying  the  most  noted  sorcerers  without  relief,  she 
inflicted  on  herself  a  mortal  wound  with  a  razor  in 
the  vain  attempt  to  cut  out  the  imaginary  cause  of 
her  internal  pain  ! 

Some  have  imagined  that  those  men  have  faith 
in  the  power  of  their  own  incantations  from  their 
performing  them  over  their  own  children,  and  even 
causing  them  to  be  acted  over  themselves  when  sick. 
This  practice  it  is  indeed  difficult  to  account  for. 
The  juggling  part  of  their  business  is  such  a  gross 
imposture  as  could  only  succeed  with  a  very  ignorant 
and  credulous  people ;  but  it  is  perhaps  in  their  case, 
as  in  some  others,  difficult  to  tell  the  precise  point 
where  credulity  ends  and  imposture  begins.  It  is 
certain  that  they  are  excited  during  their  incantations 
in  a  most  extraordinary  way,  and  positively  affirm 
that  they  hold  intercourse  with  spirits ;  nor  will  they 
allow  themselves  to  l^e  laughed  out  of  the  assertion 
however  ridiculous  it  may  appear  to  us. 

The  Waraus,  in  many  j^oints  the  most  degraded 
of  the  tribes,  are  the  most  renowned  as  sorcerers. 
The  huts  which  they  set  apart  for  the  performance 
of  their  superstitious  rites  are  regarded  with  great 
veneration. 

Mr.  Nowers,  on  visiting  a  Warau  settlement,  entered 
one  of  those  huts,  not  being  aware  of  the  offence  he 


INDIAN  SUPEESTITIONS.  367 

was  conmiitting,  and  foiiiul  it  perfectly  empty,  with 
the  exception  of  the  gourd,  or  "  niataro,"  as  it  is 
called  by  that  tribe.  There  ^^'as  in  the  centre  of  the 
hut  a  small  raised  place  about  eighteen  inches  high, 
on  which  the  fire  had  been  made  for  burninof  tobacco. 
The  sorcerer  being  asked  to  give  up  the  gourd, 
peremptorily  refused,  saying  that  if  he  did  so  his 
"  two  children  would  die  the  same  night." 

'Jliose  men  are  generally  called  upon  to  confer 
Indian  names  on  the  children  of  their  tribe.  Each 
of  those  names  has  its  meaning.  A  few  may  be  men- 
tioned as  showing  the  taste  of  the  Arawaks  in  this 
particular.  Some  are  derived  from  j)ei"Sonal  appear- 
ance, the  hair  especially  being  noticed  ;  as,  ''  Ka-barra- 
li,"  having  hair;  "  Ma-barra-'si-li,"  head  without  hair; 
"  Ka-korri-'sidi,"  curly  head,  &c.  One  boy  whom  I 
knew  was  called  l)y  a  name  signifying  soft-head. 
Some  derive  their  names  from  birds  or  other  animals, 
as  "  Koiali,"  the  red  and  blue  macaw.  Others  are 
named  after  the  tobacco,  their  fovourite  plant,  tis 
"Yuri,"  tobacco;  "  Yuri-banna,"  tobacco-leaf;  "  Yuri- 
tokoro,"  tobacco-flower, — the  latter  name  being  often 
given  to  a  handsonae  child  of  either  sex.  Others 
again  are  named  from  some  quality  or  title,  as  "  Ifili," 
the  great;  "  Adaiahu,"  the  governor,  &c.  A  j)resent 
is  given  to  the  sorcerer  who  names  the  child. 

We  have  now  to  consider  the  Oreliu,  an  important 
being  in  the  Indian  mythology.  The  orehu  is  a 
mysterious  female  inhabiting  the  waters.  Though 
not  so  decidedly  malignimt  as  the  yauhahu,  she  is 
very    capricious,    and    coiiscqucutly    dreaded    l)y    the 


368  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

benighted  Indian.  Her  supposed  form  agrees  with 
that  of  the  mermaid  of  European  fancy  (which  must 
certainly  be  well  suited  to  her  watery  abode  and 
habits) ;  but  she  does  not  confine  herself  to  that  alone, 
for  with  extraordinary  taste  in  a  female,  she  some- 
times presents  herself  above  the  water  with  the  head 
of  a  horse,  or  other  animal,  as  it  may  suit  her  fancy, 
or  the  object  she  has  in  view.  She  often  amuses 
herself  with  merely  terrifying  mankind,  but  sometimes 
bears  both  canoe  and  people  to  the  bottom.^ 

There  was  a  spot  on  the  banks  of  the  Pomeroon 
Avhere  the  earth,  Ijeing  undermined  hj  the  current, 
had  sunk,  and  the  trees  which  formerly  flourished 
there  stood  out  of  the  water  withered  and  bare, 
presenting  a  desolate  appearance.  That  was  supposed 
to  be  a  favourite  resort  of  the  orehu.  Many,  espe- 
cially of  the  Waraus,  if  eomj^elled  to  pass  the  spot 
by  night,  would  keep  close  to  the  opposite  bank,  and 
glide  with  noiseless  paddles  past  the  place  where  the 
water-spirit  was  believed  to  have  fixed  her  abode. 

The  superstitious  belief  concerning  this  being  ]3re- 
vailed  also  among  the  black  people  dwelling  on  the 
rivers  of  Guiana.  Duriuo;  the  first  few  months  of 
my  residence,  l)efore  any  Indians  attended  the  infant 

^  The  occasional  appearance  al)ove  the  surface,  of  the  Manati,  or 
Water-cow,  may  have  given  rise  to  this  superstition  in  former  days. 
But  however  that  may  be,  the  Indians  have  for  ages  drawn  a  wide 
distinction  between  the  "  Orehu  "  and  the  "  Koiamoora,"  or  man- 
ati, believing  them  to  differ  in  nature  as  in  name.  The  orehu  may 
at  pleasure  assume  the  figure  of  the  manati,  as  of  any  other 
animal,  but  the  latter  does  not,  in  their  belief,  possess  any 
supernatural    power,  and    is    eaten   when    captured. 


INDIAN  SUPERSTITIONS.  369 

Mission,  I  had  often  observed  the  terror  of  the 
black  boy  who  lived  with  mi^,  when  he  perceived  a 
light  near  the  surface  of  the  water.  It  was  merely 
the  great  lantern-fly,  which  sometimes  flies  low.  On 
one  occasion,  while  fishing  by  moonlight  on  the 
stream  in  my  small  canoe,  onr  line  was  seized  by 
something  which  we  were  unable  to  bring  to  the 
surface.  The  boy  cried  with  terror,  and  begged  me 
to  "  let  the  '  Water-mama '  ^  (as  they  call  her)  take 

^  One  of  the  Obia  dances  of  the  blacks  is  commonly  called 
the  "  u'ater-mavta  dance,"  from  the  appellation  usually  given  by 
them  to  their  adopted  patroness,  the  Orehu  of  the  Indians. 

It  may  be  interesting  briefly  to  notice  here  the  superstitions  of 
African  origin,  still  very  prevalent  among  the  black  inhabitants  of 
the  remote  coast  and  river  districts  of  Guiana.  In  detail  they 
differ  materially  from  those  of  the  red  men,  though  the  principle 
of  assumed  intercourse  -with,  and  dependence  on,  evil  spirits,  is 
the  same  in  the  fetishism  of  Africa  as  in  the  piai  system  of  the 
Indians. 

There  are  some  ideas  which  the  blacks  seem  to  have  borrowed 
from  the  Indians,  and  others  which  they  have  communicated  in 
return, — as  their  superstitious  veneration  for  the  silk-cotton  tree. 
I  have  known  Indians  as  well  as  negroes  refuse  to  cut  one  down, 
supposing  that  their  death  would  follow.  In  the  days  of  sUvery 
ofl'erings  were  presented  to  some  of  those  trees.  The  Afiicans 
would  meet  under  them  to  consult  their  priests  and  perform 
their  ceremonies,  and  hence  they  became  invested  with  a  sacred 
character. 

But  many  of  the  superstitions  of  Obia  (or  negro  witchcraft)  are 
of  a  dark  and  malignant  character,  and  the  dread  of  poison  in- 
creases the  apprehensions  they  inspire.  The  spread  of  Christian 
instruction,  and  the  reverential  obedience  paid  to  it  in  the  good 
days  which  immediately  followed  the  emancipation,  drove  those 
abominations  into  obscure  corners ;  but  they  have  been  carefully 
preserved,  practised  in  secret,  and  believed  in  by  many. 

I  once  attended  an  aged  female,  who  could  not  die  in  peace  till 
she  had  confessed  that,  though    baptized   and   an   attendant  on 

B    K 


370  THE  INDIAN  TRIBEH  OF  GUIANA. 

possession  of  it,  as  otherwise  she  would  rise,  seize, 
and  carry  us  under  water  in  her  anger ! "     The  line 

Christian  worship,  she  had  "  worked"  a  charm  to  cause  the  death 
6f  some  unknown  person  who  had  stolen  her  fowls.  The  charm 
consisted  in  pounding  certain  herbs  in  a  wooden  mortar  for  nine 
successive  days,  with  magical  incantations. — Among  the  inhabi- 
tants of  the  rivers,  I  have  heard  women  obstinately  attributing 
the  deaths  of  their  children  to  others,  whom  they  accused  of 
having  destroyed  them  by  Obia,  and  of  keeping  thei?'  souls  confined 
in  bottles  ! — To  relics  and  scraps  of  rubbish,  such  as  hair,  feathers, 
blood,  animal's  teeth,  bones  and  dirt  from  graves,  &c.,  they  attribute 
great  power,  A  man  shot  while  committing  a  burglary  had  human 
bones  bound  on  his  arm  as  an  amulet,  to  render  him  invulnerable. 
Other  human  bones,  which  had  been  charred,  were  found  on  him, 
and  had  been  used  by  him  and  his  accomplices.  When  burnt 
with  certain  herbs,  their  vapour  was  believed  to  cause  their  victims 
to  sleep  soundly. 

Those  monstrous  ideas,  too  lamentable  for  ridicule,  will  show 
the  nature  of  the  superstition  which  still  darkens  the  minds  of 
many,  but  can  hardly  appear  surprising  to  those  who  consider  the 
popular  notions  of  witchcraft  formerly  so  prevalent,  and  still 
lingering  in  many  countries,  and  among  races  which  have  been 
for  ages  called  Christian. 

In  Guiana  this  superstition  has  not  ceased  to  have  its  priests — 
men  who  preside  by  night  over  secret  dances  of  abominable 
character — and  its  votaries,  who  resort  to  them  for  aid  in  various 
unlawful  ways. 

The  orgies  which  have  taken  place  at  some  of  their  meetings  can- 
not be  fully  described  here.  Commencing  quietly,  they  gradually 
increase  in  excitement,  until  both  sexes,  throwing  oif  all  their  clothes, 
have  v/orked  themselves  into  a  state  of  temporary  madness. 

A  kind  of  baptism  has  been  sometimes  performed,  as  an  initiatory 
rite  to  adults  and  children.  A  gentleman  who  was  an  imknown  and 
unwelcome  eye-witness  of  one  of  those  ceremonies,  saw  the  offi- 
ciating priest  or  "  doctor  "  dancing  round  and  jumping  over  an 
infant,  with  many  strange  noises  and  incantations.  At  a  certain 
stage  of  the  proceedings  he  dashed  water  over  it.  After  that,  he 
took  it  up  and  passed  his  hands  over  its  body,  holding  it  by  each 


INDIAN  SUPUBSTITIONS.  371 

suddenly  snapped  and  our  hooks  were  all  lost,  Avliicli 
compelled  us  to  return  home,  and  he  would  not 
venture  again  on  the  stream  to  fish  by  night. 

The  Orehu,  though  a  very  capricious  lady,  is  not 
always  malicious  and  cruel ;  on  the  contrary,  she  has 
sometimes  exerted  herself  in  a  benevolent  manner, 
and  is  supposed  by  the  Indians  to  have  been  the 
authoress  of  that  system  of  sorcery  by  which  they 
seek  to  defend  themselves  from  the  attacks  of  the 
yauhahu.  Their  tradition  respecting  this  Avill  be 
given  in  the  next  chapter. 

In  the  above  picture  of  the  habits  of  the  Indians 
of  Guiana,  as  our  missionaries   found  them,   we   see 

limb  in  succession,  and  muttering  charms.  The  child  having  been 
thus  fortified  for  life,  as  he  said,  by  the  power  of  his  familiar 
spirits,  was  then  given  back  to  its  mother,  who  stood  amidst  the 
admiring  votaries  around. 

Charms  and  potions  to  cause  love  are  obtained  from  the  pro- 
fessors of  that  evil  art.  They  are  dangerous  in  their  effects.  •  I 
have  myself  known  more  than  one  instance  of  raging  insanity 
produced  by  them. 

The  reader  must  not,  however,  suppose  that  those  practices 
(though  too  prevalent  in  isolated  districts,  and  among  the  more 
ignorant  and  vicious  portion  of  the  Creole  population)  are  uni- 
versally followed.  Far  from  it.  The  provision  which  (as  staled  in 
our  introductory  chapter)  was  long  ago  made  for  the  spread  of 
religion  and  education  has  not  been  without  effect.  Many  thousands 
have  received  benefit  from  the  churches,  chapels,  and  schools,  which 
stud  our  line  of  cultivated  coast  between  the  mouths  of  the 
Corentyn  and  Pomeroon. — But  even  among  those  who  from  educa- 
tion have  learned  to  despise,  or  from  religious  principles  abhor, 
those  works  of  darkness,  there  is  a  natural  and  well-grounded  dread 
of  the  men  or  women  who  practise  them.  Few  would  think  it 
altogether  safe  to  incur  the  vengeance  of  one  who  is  supposed  to  be 
an  adept  in  "  working  Obia," 

B    B    2 


372  THE  INDIAN  TBIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

many  dark  shadows.  They  are  not,  indeed,  idolaters, 
nor  addicted  to  human  sacrifices,  as  were  some 
American  races  far  more  advanced  in  civilization. 
Their  general  character  is  also  in  many  respects 
amiable.  But  superstition — Satan's  substitute  for  true 
religion — in  their  case,  as  in  many  other  instances, 
has  greatly  perverted  it,  causing  much  blighting 
terror,  sin,  and  misery.  The  craft  of  the  wicked 
one  led  their  fathers  to  forsake  the  Fountain  of 
Good,  and  to  seek  intercourse  with  that  which 
they  believe  and  confess  to  be  evil.  Something 
similar  to  their  -superstitions  was  practised  among 
the  sinful  Jews  of  old,  as  we  may  learn  from  the 
expostulation  of  the  Prophet : — 

"  AVhen  they  shall  say  unto  you,  Seek  unto  them 
that  have  familiar  spirits,  and  unto  wizards  that  peep, 
and  that  mutter :  should  not  a  people  seek  unto 
their  God?" 


CHAPTEK    X. 

MYTHOLOGY    AND    LEGENDARY    TALES. 

Legends  of  supernatural  Beings — Kanaima  Tiger  and  other  Animals 
possessed  by  them — JMyths  arising  from  singular  Appearances 
in  natural  Objects — Of  the  Creation,  Deluge,  &c. — Legends  of 
the  Acawoios,  Macusis,  Caribs,  Tamanacs,  &c. — Legends  of 
the  Coast  Tribes,  the  "SVaraus  and  Arawaks — Eemarks  on 
the  above. 

The  heatlieii  Indian  has  been  tauglit,  from  his  earliest 
infancy,  to  reverence  and  follow  the  superstitious 
practices  detailed  in  our  last  chapter.  He  is  in  con- 
sequence attached  to  them  by  early  training  and  the 
force  of  habit.  Believing  that  he  has  no  other 
defence  against  sickness  and  the  ills  of  life,  he  clings 
to  them  as  his  refuge  and  strength,  and  only  help 
in  time  of  trouble. 

We  now  turn  from  the  consideration  of  those 
practices  to  that  of  the  traditionary  lore  on  v/hich 
some  of  them  are  founded.  They  have,  as  we  have 
seen,  a  basis  in  the  mythology  of  the  various  tril3es, 
and  are  supported  by  many  legendary  tales  which 
relate  the  deeds  of  the  yauhahu,  the  demons  dreaded 
by  all,  or  of  the  still  more  terrible  "  Kanaima, " 
which  last   expression,  though  applied    to    the    man 


374  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GVIANA. 

who  lias  devoted  himself  to  perform  a  deed  of 
blood,  seems  more  properly  to  belong  to  the  mur- 
derous spirit  under  whose  influence  he  acts,  and 
which  is  sujjposed  to  possess  him. 

Some  of  their  legends  describe  the  destructive 
deeds  of  animals  of  which  the  same  spirit,  or  a 
human  soul  under  its  influence,  has  taken  possession. 
A  jaguar  which  displays  unusual  audacity  in  approach- 
ing men  will  often  unnerve  even  a  brave  hunter  by 
the  fear  that  it  may  be  a  Kanaima  tiger.  "  This," 
reasons  the  Indian,  "if  it  be  but  an  ordinary  wild 
beast,  I  may  kill  with  bullet  or  arrow ;  but  what 
will  be  my  fate  if  I  assail  the  man-destroyer — the 
terrible  Kanaima  f"'^ 

Tales  of  a  different  kind  describe  the  grotesque 
dances  and  doings  of  bush-hogs  and   other  animals, 

^  Many  of  the  Indians  believe  that  those  "  Kanaima  "  animals 
are  possessed  by  the  spirits  of  men  who  have  devoted  themselves 
to  deeds  of  blood  and  cannibalism.  To  enjoy  the  savage  delight  of 
killing  and  devouring  human  beings,  such  a  person  will  assume  the 
shape,  or  his  soul  animate  the  body,  of  a  jaguar,  approach  the 
sleeping-places  of  men,  or  M^aylay  the  solitary  Indian  in  his  path. 
As  with  Lycaon,  who  in  the  ancient  story  of  a  far-distant  land, 
became  a  wolf,  the  outward  figure  is  changed,  while  the  look  and 
impulse  of  savage  ferocity  are  unaltered  : 

" eadem  violentia  vultu  : 


lidem  oculi  lucent,  eadem  feritatis  imago  est." 

It  is  strange  to  find  a  superstition  so  closely  resembling  that 
of  the  '^ivere-tvolf"  or  "  loiqj-c/aroii"  of  the  European  races  in 
full  force  in  the  forests  of  Guiana.  The  dreaded  jaguar  in  those 
parts  takes  the  place  of  the  wolf,  which  is  unknown.  There  is  no 
superstition  more  prevalent  among  the  Indians  than  this,  and  none 
M'hich  causes  more  terror. 


MYTHOLOG  Y  AND  LEGEND AB  Y  TA  LES.  3  7  5 

possessed  for  the  time  by  spirits  of  another  class, 
full  of  mii'tli  and  jollity,  and  more  desirous  of  fun 
or  merry  enjoyment  than  of  injuring  mankind.  Of 
those  tales,  which  rather  amuse  than  terrify,  the 
Indians  are  fond,  and  in  some  of  their  dances 
attempt  to  imitate  the  antics  of  the  animals  pos- 
sessed by  those  merry  beings.^ 

Another  and  very  numerous  class  of  fables  has 
evidently  arisen  from  the  efforts  of  Indians  of 
imaginative  minds  to  account  for  unusual  appear- 
ances in  natural  objects.  Thus  the  Indians  of  the 
Corentyn  account  for  certain  cliffs  being  bare  of 
vegetation,  by  the  superstition  that  at  certain 
seasons  an  enormous  serpent  issues  from  its  lurking 
place,  and  glides  along  them  on  its  way  to  drink 
of  the  waters  of  the  river.^  And  the  fiction  of  the 
leap  of  the  tiger  across  the  Demerara,  from  the  hill 
which  bears  his  name,  arose  from  the  fancied  resem- 
blance to  a  jaguar's  footprint  of  some  marks  found 
on  the  rock  from  which  the  spring  is  said  to  have 
been  made.  It  being  allowed  that  spirits  often  enter 
into  those  animals  or  assume  their  form,  a  moderate 
leap  of  a  furlong  or  two  by  a  beast  so  possessed  had 
nothing  in  it  incredible  to  an  Indian  whose  mind  was 
imbued  with  that  superstition. 

Of  similar  origin  are  the  traditions  relating  to  that 
singular  basaltic  column  called  "  Pure-piapa,"  or  the 

^  In  one  of  the  Acawoio  dances  each  performer  has  a  rude  kind 
of  trumpet,  with  the  carved  figure  of  some  animal  or  reptile  affixed 
to  it,  which  for  the  time  he  is  supposed  to  personate. 

-  Schomburgk's  Ascent  of  the  Corentyn. 


376  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

"  headless  tree  "  (of  which  Schomburgk  has  given  a  re- 
presentation), and  some  others  of  the  same  kind,  which 
are  supposed  to  have  been  cut  down  by  the  Great 
Spirit,  and  by  His  touch  converted  into  stone.  Many 
rocks,  bearing  in  figure  remote  resemblance  to  ani- 
mal or  vegetable  objects,  are  met  with  in  the  interior, 
and  are  supj^osed  by  the  wilder  tribes  to  have  been 
thus  petrified  by  the  touch  of  Makonaima  during 
his  visits  to  this  lower  world. 

With  legends  such  as  these,  which  might  have 
furnished  rough  materials  for  the  verse  of  an  Indian 
Ovid  (could  their  race  have  produced  such  a 
poet),  are  mingled  traditions  of  the  Creation  and 
the  Deluge,  such  as  are  found  to  prevail  among 
uncivilized  people. 

Unlike  the  aborigines  of  Hayti,  whose  patriotic 
vanity  led  them  to  believe  that  their  island  was  the 
first  of  ail  thiugs,  and  that  the  sun  and  moon  issued 
from  one  of  its  caverns,  and  men^  from  another : 
the  tribes  of  Guiana  acknowledg-e  the  immediate 
work  of  a  Creator. 

Among  those  near  the   coast,  the  belief  formerly 


^  Those  men  wandered  about  for  a  long  time  destitute  of  women. 
At  length,  on  the  borders  of  a  certain  lake,  among  the  branches  of 
the  trees,  they  discovered  some  animals,  which  proved  to  be  women. 
But  it  was  very  difficult  to  get  near  them,  and  impossible  to  hold 
them  when  overtaken,  as  they  were  as  slippery  as  eels.  At  length 
they  employed  certain  men  whose  hands  were  rendered  rough  by 
a  kind  of  leprosy.  They  succeeded  in  capturing  four  of  those 
slippery  females,  from  wliom  the  world  was  peopled. — This  was 
the  belief  of  the  Indians  of  Hayti.  (Irving's  Columbus,  book  vi. 
chap.  X.) 


MYTHOLOG  Y  A  ND  LEGEND  A  E  Y  TA  LES.  377 

prevailing  was,  that  "  tlie  Great  Spirit,  having 
created  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  seated  Himself 
on  a  huge  silk-cotton  tree  by  a  river  side,  and  cut 
off  pieces  of  its  bark  or  wood,  which  he  cast  all 
around.  Those  which  touched  the  water  became 
fishes  ;  others  flew  in  the  air  as  birds ;  w^hile  some, 
as  animals  of  various  kinds,  and  lastly  man,  moved 
on  the  earth." 

To  this  very  ancient  legend  various  additions  have 
been  made  during  the  last  three  centuries.  Accord- 
ing to  one  of  these  the  white  race  sprung  from 
the  branch  of  a  certain  tree,  which  the  Great  Maker 
cast  upon  the  water. — There  is  in  this  a  little  quiet 
satire,  as  the  tree  from  which  the  branch  was  taken 
is  of  little  or  no  value.  • 

The  Indians  who  have  been  much  in  contact  with 
civilization  are  rapidly  forgetting  the  ancient  tradi- 
tions of  their  race.  But  those  tales  still  flourish  in 
the  far  interior,  and  the  dreary  swamp  region  stretch- 
ino-  towards  the  Orinoco.  In  the  villao;es  of  those 
distant  wilds,  as  yet  unvisited  by  civilized  man, 
those  legends,  preserved  through  many  generations, 
are  still  repeated  by  the  elders,  reclining  in  their 
hammocks  over  the  evening  fires,  to  their  children  ; — 
who,  having  no  other  lore,  implicitly  believe  and 
carefully  preserve  and  transmit  them. 

From  one  thus  instructed  in  childhood  by  the 
ancients  of  his  tribe,  I  obtained  the  following  legend. 
It  will,  I  think,  give  a  tolerably  correct  idea  of  those 
"  old  peoples'  stories,"  as  the  rising  race  somewhat 
contemptuously  call  them.     It  is  a  fable  in  which. 


378  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

as  in  those  of  ^sop,  animals  largely  figure  ;  and 
some  parts  are  very  absurd,  as  was  to  be  expected 
in  tlie  fanciful  tales  with  which  those  children  of 
larger  growth  amuse  their  leisure  hours.  The 
Acawoio  who  repeated  it,  while  striving  to  maintain 
a  very  grave  aspect,  as  befitted  the  general  nature 
of  the  subject,  evidently  enjoyed  some  parts  of  the 
recital. 

"  In  the  beginning  of  this  world  the  birds  and 
lieasts  were  created  by  Makonaima, — the  great  spirit 
whom  no  man  hath  seen.  They,  at  that  time,  were 
all  endowed  with  the  gift  of  speech.  Sign,  the  son  of 
Makonaima,  was  placed  to  rule  over  them.  All 
lived  in  harmony  together  and  submitted  to  his 
gentle  dominion.  They  were  daily  sent  forth  to 
feed  in  the  forests  around,  and  on  their  return 
each  brought  a  portion  of  the  best  food  it  could 
find  as  an  act  of  respectful  homage  to  its  pro- 
tector and  lord. 

"  The  wild  productions  of  the  forest  were  then  the 
only  food  of  man  and  beast.  Cultivation  was  un- 
known. But  Makonaima,  to  surprise  his  creatures 
with  his  bounty,  was  causing  to  spring  out  of 
the  earth  an  enormous  and  wonderful  ti'ee.  Each 
branch  of  that  great  tree  produced  a  different  kind 
of  fruit  ;  while  from  and  around  its  trunk  grew 
bananas,  plantains,  and  cassava ;  with  maize,  and 
corn  of  all  kinds.  Yams  and  other  edibles  also 
grew  from  and  clustered  around  the  roots  of  this 
famous  tree,  which  (though  white  men  do  not  know 
it)    is   the   original   stock    from   whence   have   sprung 


MYTHOLOGY  AND  LEGENDARY  TALES.  379 

all  the  })lants  now  cultivated  among  the  nations  of 
the  earth. 

"  The  acouri,  trotting  inquisitively  about  with  his 
nimble,  slender  legs,  and  bright-black  eyes,  first  dis- 
covered this  great  tree.  Daily  he  came  to  the  spot, 
and  selfishly  ate  his  fill,  without  making  it  known 
for  the  public  benefit.  His  excellent  condition,  how- 
ever, and  some  remains  of  delicious  fruit  adhering 
to  his  lips,  caused  the  truth  to  be  suspected  in  spite 
of  his  denials. 

"  Sign  accordingly  commissioned  the  wood-pecker 
to  keep  him  in  sight.  The  wood-pecker,  a  well- 
meaning  and  honest  bird,  did  so  perseveringly, 
yet  failed  to  detect  him.  For  having  a  great  fond- 
ness for  wood-ants  and  other  insects,  it  could  not 
resist  the  temptation  of  examining  every  dry  branch 
in  the  way.  The  wary  acouri,  hearing  a  continual 
tap-tap  overhead  wherever  he  went,,  would  not  visit 
the  tree  that  day. 

"  The  rat  was  then  sent  forth,  who  proved  an 
excellent  detective.  He  brought  home  specimens 
of  the  finest  fruit,  convicted  the  acouri,  in  the  pre- 
sence of  Sigu  and  the  whole  community,  of  selfishness 
and  falsehood,  and  conducted  them  to  that  choice 
feeding-ground. 

"All  were  glad,  and  desirous  of  continual  enjoy- 
ment until  the  whole  should  be  consumed.  But 
Sio-u,  gifted  with  reason,  and  mindful  of  future 
generations,  determined  to  cut  down  the  tree,  and 
replenish  the  whole  earth  around  by  planting  every 
slip  and  seed  that  it  would   furnish.     In  the  latter 


380  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

task  he  employed  all  the  beasts  and  birds  for  some 
time,  it  being  for  the  public  good. — This  was  the 
first  attempt  on  earth  at  cultivation. 

"  All  assisted  willingly  except  Iwarrika ''  (the 
monkey),  "  who  being  very  lazy  and  full  of  mischief, 
avoided  his  share  of  the  labour,  and  by  his  tricks 
thwarted  the  efforts  of  the  others.  As  he  would  do 
no  good,  Sign,  to  keep  him  from  doing  harm,  at  last 
sent  him  to  a  stream  to  fetch  water,  giving  him  only 
a  '  quake,'  or  open-work  basket,  to  bring  it  in. 

"  The  stump  of  the  wondrous  tree  was  found  to 
be  hollow,  and  the  cavity  filled  with  water,  containing 
the  fry  of  every  variety  of  fresh-water  fish,  (Up  to 
that  period  fishes  had  only  existed  in  the  great 
salt  sea.)  Sign  determined  to  stock  with  them  all 
the  streams  and  lakes  upon  earth,  in  so  just  a  manner 
that  every  variety  of  choice  fish  should  be  found  in 
each."  But  this  intention, —so  equitable  and  bene- 
volent to  future  generations, — was  unexpectedly  frus- 
trated. "  The  water  in  the  cavity,,  being  connected 
with  a  subterraneous  fountain  or  reservoir,  began  to 
overflow.  To  stop  its  increase,  he  hastily  constructed 
a  closely-woven  basket  of  the  kind  called  '  wallamba ' 
(or  warrampa),  with  which  he  covered  the  stump, 
and  this,  by  some  magical  power,  restrained  the 
swellino;  fountain  within. 

"  Iwarrika,  the  mischievous  monkey,  tired  of  his 
profitless  task,  stealthily  returned.  Seeing  the  in- 
verted wallamba,  he  imagined  that  it  covered  the 
choicest  fruit,  specially  reserved  for  his  master's 
refreshment  when  the  labour  of    planting  should  be 


MYTHOLOGY  AND  LEGENDARY  TALES.  381 

over.  To  monkey-nature  the  temptation  tliiis  offered 
was  irresistible.  There  were  the  finest  delicacies,  and 
no  one  near !  Such  a  chance  might  never  happen 
again.  So  he  hastily  forced  up  the  magic  cover,  and 
the  next  instant  was  gasping  and  struggling  in  abject 
terror  and  astonishment,  being  overturned  and  nearly 
drowned  by  a  mighty  torrent  which  burst  forth,  and 
from  a  rapidly  enlarging  aperture  overspread  the 
earth  around.^ 

"  Gatherino'  his  little  flock  toQ-ether  to  save  them 
from  the  rising  waters,  Sign  led  them  to  the  highest 
spot  of  land,  on  which  grew  some  enormous  cocorite 
palms.  Selecting  the  tallest  of  these,  he  made  the 
birds  and  climbing  animals  ascend.  The  animals 
which  could  not  climb,  and  were  not  amphibious, 
he  placed  in  a  cave  with  a  very  narrow  entrance. 
This  he  carefully  closed,  and  sealed  with  wax,  after 
giving  the  inmates  a  long  thorn  with  which  to  pierce 
the  wax,  and  ascertain  whether  the  waters  were  above 
their  level  or  no."  What  they  did  for  air  we  are 
not  informed. 

"  Sign,  having  thus  done  his  best  for  the  safety  of 

^  The  belief  of  the  natives  of  Hayti,  that  tlie  waters  of  the 
universal  deluge  burst  forth  from  a  large  gourd,  in  which  a  cacique 
had  placed  the  bones  of  his  only  son  (after  killing  him  for  treason), 
and  wliich  was  accidentally  thrown  down  by  some  meddlers  who 
wished  to  peep  into  it,  was  even  more  absurd  than  the  above.  In 
the  swelling  water  and  fishes  found  in  the  gourd  by  the  cacique 
previously  to  the  accident,  and  his  care  after  that  discovery  to  keep 
it  closed,  there  is  a  great  resemblance  to  this  Acawoio  legend, 
though  all  the  other  circumstances  are  widely  ditferent.  (See 
Irving's  Columbus,  book  vi.  chap,  x.) 


382  THE  INDIAN  TBIBE8  OF  GUIANA. 

all,  climbed  the  cocorite ;  being  driven  by  the  rising 
water  to  the  topmost  branches.  A  terrible  night,  or 
rather  period  of  darkness  and  storm  equal  in  length 
to  many  days  and  nights,  then  ensued,  during  which 
all  suffered  intensely  from  cold  and  hunger. 

"  Arowta"^  (the  large  red  monkey,  erroneously  called 
the  baboon,  an  animal  of  no  great  beauty,  but,  as  it 
seems,  of  sensitive  nature)  "  acutely  felt  that  painful 
state  of  things,  and  being  at  length  quite  overpowered 
by  his  feelings,  gave  vent  to  his  own  misery,  and 
increased  that  of  all  around,  by  yelling  in  the  most 
dismal  manner.  His  horrible  cries, — issuing  from 
distended  throat,  and  increasing  with  his  terror — 
became  deafening,  when  at  length  he  found  his  feet 
and  tail,  and  the  branch  to  which  they  tightly  clung, 
immersed  in  the  swelling  waters. 

"  The  good  Sign,  anxious  for  the  safety  of  all, 
patiently  endured  this  and  every  other  discomfort,  and 
from  time  to  time  dropped  the  seeds  of  the  cocorite 
into  the  water,  that  he  might  judge  by  the  sound 
of  its  elevation.  At  length  the  jDcriods  which  elapsed 
before  the  splash  was  heard  became  longer  and  longer. 
Then  at  last  was  heard  the  dull  sound  of  the  seeds 
striking  the  soft  earth,  and  at  the  same  time  the 
birds,  each  with  its  own  peculiar  note,  began  joyfully 
to  hail  the  approach  of  day." 

The  adventures  which  followed— how  the  hungry 
waracabba,  or  trumpeter-bird,  disobeying   Sign,  ven- 

1  Called  by  the  Caribs  Arawata. — 'The  words  Aragudto  and 
Aloudte,  by  wliicli  some  writers  designate  tbe  Mycetes  or  howling 
monkey,  are  derived  from  the  above. 


MYTHOLOGY  AND  LEQENDARY  TALES.  383 

tured  on  the  earth  in  the  dim  light  to  seek  for  food ; 
and  had  his  legs,  till  then  of  respectable  size,  imme- 
diately covered  and  devoured  by  legions  of  hungry 
ants  issuing  from  their  nests,  so  that  little  but  the 
slender  stick-like  bones  remained  ; — how  Sign  rescued 
his  unfortunate  trumpeter,  and  with  infinite  trouble 
kindled  a  spark  of  fire,  which,  while  he  sought  for 
fuel,  the  marudi  (or  bush-fowl)  snapped  up  in  mistake 
for  a  red  shining  insect ;— how  the  alligator,  who  had 
just  come  ashore  to  pay  his  respects,  being  accused, 
on  account  of  lii-s  ugliness  and  general  bad  character, 
of  having  maliciously  swallowed  it,  had  his  tongue 
drawn  out  by  the  roots  that,  by  looking  down  his 
throat,  the  truth  might  be  ascertained  in  a  manner 
most  satisfactory  (at  least  to  the  others) ; — how  the 
marudi  was  then  shown  to  be  the  real  culprit  by 
the  glowing  spark  which  stuck  in  his  throat,  causing 
the  bright  red  wattle  or  enlar2;ement  of  the  outer 
skin; — these  and  the  various  faults  and  mishaps  of  the 
other  lairds  and  animals  need  not  be  further  related. 

It  is  enough  to  say,  should  any  be  sceptical,  that 
the  Indians  can  point  to  their  eftects,  which  are 
manifest  and  visible  to  all  at  the  present  day.  For 
"  the  marudis  all  bear  on  their  throats  the  red  mark 
of  their  ancestor's  unlucky  haste  ; — the  waracabbas 
perpetuate,  in  their  slender  apologies  for  legs,  the 
effects  of  the  misfortune  which  befel  the  first  trum- 
peter ; — and  all  the  alHgators "  (so  the  Indians  say) 
"  are,  to  this  day,  destitute  of  tongues." 

In  like  manner,  the  strenuous  efforts  of  the  "  baboon" 
to    express    his   sorrows    during    the   flood  we    must 


384  THE  INDIAN  TitlBES  OF  GUIANA. 

suppose  to  have  occasioned  that  swelling  of  the  throat 
(or  drum-like  bony  expansion  of  the  larynx)  which 
is  seen  in  his  descendants,  and  enables  them,  in  bel- 
lowing notes  worthy  of  their  progenitor,  to  express 
their  feelings,  whenever  they  are  excited,  or,  towards 
morning,  feel  hungry  and  cold. 

The  monkey,  whose  dishonest  propensities  caused 
the  flood,  remained  uncured  of  his  idleness,  love  of 
mischief,  and  pilfering,  and  transmitted  those  quali- 
ties unimpaired  to  his  children.  He  seems,  however, 
to  have  acquired  a  profound  horror  of  a  ducking, 
which  they  also  fully  share,  and  will  manifest  to  any 
one  administering  it  to  them. 

"  Sign's  plan  of  cultivation  prospered,  as  the  plants 
all  grew  up  after  the  waters  had  subsided ;  but  the 
fresh-water  fishes,  having  been  dispersed  and  left  to 
themselves,  found  their  way  into  the  streams  so  irre- 
gularly, that  many  rivers  are  to  this  day  destitute 
of  the  choicest  kinds." 

In  this  way  the  Acawoios  and  other  Indians  fanci- 
fully, and  with  some  humour,  endeavour  to  account 
for  whatever  strikes  them  as  remarkable  in  nature, 
and  engraft  those  fancies  on  traditions  of  the  Deluge, 
and  what  bears  some  resemblance  to  that  of  "  the 
golden  age." 

To  this  legend  there  is  a  second  part  repeated  by 
some,  in  which  the  mother  of  Sign  appears,  and  two 
wicked  brethren  who  hate  and  persecute  him,  which 
he  bears  with  invincible  patience.  They  beat  him 
to  death,  burn  him  to  ashes,  and  bury  him  alive  ; 
but  with  all  their  wicked  efforts  cannot  make  an  end 


MYTHOLOGY  AND  LEGENDARY  TALE!<.  385 

of  liim,  as  lie  continually  revives.  After  l)oaring  all 
manner  of  injuries,  lie  finally  ascends  a  liigli  and 
precipitous  mountain,  rising  liiglier  and  higher  till 
he  is  lost  to  view.  Those  additions  to  the  original 
tale  may  have  arisen  from  some  imperfect  accounts, 
heard  by  their  ancestors  from  Europeans,  of  the  suffer- 
ings of  saints,  or  of  Him  who  is  higher  than  all  saints. 
As  the  ancient  Greeks  attributed  to  their  demi-f>;od 
Hercules,  and  the  heroes  of  their  own  mythology,  the 
wonderful  deeds  they  heard  of  the  heroes  of  other  lands, 
so  in  the  story  of  Sign,  the  heroic  personage  of  the 
Acawoios,  whatever  greatly  struck  their  fancy  would 
naturally  be  incorporated,  in  some  altered  shape, 
after  its  true  source  had  been  forgotten. — I  may  add 
that  it  was  a  pleasant  surprise  to  me  to  find,  in  the 
mythology  of  so  wild  a  race,  a  hero  so  generally 
patient  and  benevolent  as  he  is  represented. 

To  enable  the  reader  to  judge  fairly  of  the  legendary 
tales  of  this  important  tribe,  I  have  given  the  above 
almost  in  full,  notwithstanding  the  puerility  of 
certain  portions. 

Many  Indian  legends,  not  in  themselves  descriptive 
of  the  flood  of  great  waters,  have  reference  to  it. 
The  following  every  classical  scholar  will  deem 
worthy  of  preservation. 

The  Macusis  told  Sir  R.  Schomburgk  that  ''  the 
only  person  who  survived  the  general  deluge  re-peopled 
the  earth  by  converting  stones  into  human  beings." 
And  the  Tamcinacs  of  the  Orinoco  have,  according 
to  Humboldt,  the  same  tradition  in  a  modified  form. 
"  AVhen  those  people  are  asked  how  the  human  race 

c  c 


38G  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

survived  the  great  flood  (the  '  age  of  waters '  of  the 
Mexicans),  they  unhesitatingly  reply  that  one  man 
and  one  woman  were  saved  by  taking  refuge  on  the 
lofty  mountain  of  Tamanacu,  on  the  banks  of  the 
Asiveru  (Cuchivero),  and  that  they  then  threw  over 
their  heads  the  fruits  of  the  Mauritia  (or  ita)  palm, 
from  the  kernels  of  which  sprang  men  and  women, 
who  again  peopled  the  earth."  ^ 

1  Humboldt's  Views  of  Nature. 

These  two  legends,  wMch  were  doubtless  in  tlieir  origiu  one  and 
the  same,  bear  a  marvellous  likeness  to  the  Thessalian  tradition  of 
the  flood,  according  to  which,  assisted  by  his  wife  Pyi-rha, — 

"Deucalion  vacuum  lapides  jactavit  in  orbem, 
Uncle  homines  nati ;  " — 

— a  resemblance  which  of  course  did  not  fail  to  strike  the  learned 
travellers  who  have  brought  the  legends  to  our  notice.  It  is 
indeed  so  surprisingly  great  that,  when  we  consider  the  vast 
distance,  both  of  time  and  country,  and  the  extreme  difference 
of  race,  we  should  certainly  feel  tempted  to  doubt  the  genuineness 
of  the  Indian  tradition,  did  it  not  rest  on  such  high  authority. 

The  reader  of  the  foregoing  pages  may  also  have  noticed 
another  singular  resemblance  between  the  accounts  given  by 
ancient  authors  of  Amazonian  communities  in  the  Old  "World, 
and  those  Ave  have  already  mentioned  as  current  among  our 
Indian  tribes  in  the  jN^ew.  Sir  "W.  Raleigh,  who  in  1595  heard 
the  latter  from  an  old  cacique,  notices  the  conformity  between 
tliose  tales  and  what  is  recorded  of  the  ancient  Amazons,  save  in 
the  cutting  ofi"  of  their  right  breasts,  which,  saith  he,  "  I  do  not 
find  to  be  true." 

The  general  resemblance  holds  good  also  in  the  great  distance 
from  each  other  of  the  localities  which  those  independent  women 
were  supposed  to  inhabit.  For,  as  some  of  the  ancient  authors 
placed  those  female  communities  near  the  Euxine  or  Caspian  seas, 
— others  on  the  borders  of  India,  and  some  even  in  Libya ; — so  in 


MYTHOLOG  Y  AND  LEGEND  A  R  Y  TA  LES.  3  S  7 

It  was  durino-  the  subsidence  of  the  oreat  \\at(>i'S 
that  Amalivaca — venerated  by  the  Caribs,  and  more 
especially  by  the  Tamauacs — is  said  to  have  arrived 
in  a  bark,  and  carved  the  sculptures  now  seen  liigli 
on  the  perpendicular  sides  of  the  rocks  which  border 
the  great  rivers. 

The  same  Amalivaca  also  performed  many  other 
mighty  works.  He  was  tolerably  successful  in  making 
the  eartli's  surface  sufficiently  level  for  the  habitation 
of  man,  l)ut  failed  in  removing  the  impediment  which 
the  currents  of  rivers  offer  to  persons  ascending  them. 
Endeavouring  to  rectify  that  evil,  and  heroically 
commencing  with  the  mighty  Orinoco,  he  strove  to 
arrange  its  waters  in  such  a  way  that  its  current 
should,  in  every  part  and  at  the  same  time,  assist 
paddlers  both  up  and  down.  But  the  obstinacy  of 
the  stubborn  river  baffled  all  his  endeavours  to  impart 
a  double  slope  to  its  waters,  and  make  them  run  in 
two  opposite  ways  at  once,  so  that  this  well-meant 
but  singularly  difficult  undertaking  had  to  be 
abandoned. 

This  mythical  ]3ersonage  seems  to  have  known,  and 
required  the  power  of  music,  to  arouse  his  spirit  to 
fresh  effi)rts,  and  to  console  it  under  disappoint- 
ment. His  house,  consisting  of  some  iDlocks  of  stone 
piled  one  on  another,  and  forming  a  sort  of  cavern, 
may  still  be  seen  on  the  plains  of  Maita,  and  near 

the  legends  of  the  red  men  of  Guiana  we  find  them  placed  by- 
different  tribes  in  regions  widely  separated  from  each  other — on 
the  south  of  the  Amazon,  within  the  curve  of  the  Orinoco,  or  on 
the  borders  of  our  province. 

c  c  2 


388  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

it  is  "  a  large  stone,  which  the  Indians  say  was  an 
instrument  of  music,  the  drum  of  Amalivaca." ' 

In  this  latter  legend,  heard  by  Humboldt  in  the 
remote  interior  of  Guiana,  we  have  another  instance 
of  the  tendency  of  the  Indians,  in  common  with  most 
wild  races,  to  consider  rocks  which  resemble  other 
objects  in  form  as  those  objects  in  a  state  of  petri- 
faction, and  to  connect  them  with  the  supernatural 
beings  and  heroic  personages  of  their  mythology. 

"We  come  now  to  the  traditions  of  those  tribes 
Avho  dwell  nearer  to  the  shore  of  the  Atlantic. 

The  Warau  legends,  into  which  I  have  inquired,  like 
those  of  the  Acawoios  abeady  noticed,  have  hitherto 
been  known  to  few  (if  any)  but  the  Indians  them- 
selves. They  are  exceedingly  extravagant,  and 
display  a  fertility  of  imagination  such  as  we  could 
hardly  expect  to  find  in  a  race  whose  mental  powers 
have  been  so  little  cultivated. 

The  following  wild  legend  contains  their  ancient 
belief  respecting  their  own  origin  and  that  of  the 
Caribs.  It  was  told  me  by  a  AVarau  from  the  remote 
Aruca,  a  man  very  small  in  stature,  but  great  as  an 
authority  in  the  legends  of  his  people.  His  country- 
men had  referred  me  to  him  for  an  answer  to  the 
question  "  whether  it  were  true,  as  I  had  been  told, 
that  their  nation  had  formerly  inhabited  the  banks 
of  the  Essequibo,  and  been  driven  thence  to  the 
swamps  by  the  fortune  of  war?" 

In  reply  to  this  question  he,  with  grave  earnest- 

^  Humboldt's  N^arrative,  chap.  xxiv. 


MYTHOLOGY  AND  LEGENDARY  TALES.  389 

ness  and  certainly  to  my  surprise,  told  me  that, 
according  to  tlieii*  ancient  belief,  "  the  original  aljode 
of  the  AYaraus  was  not  on  this  lower  earth  at  all, 
but  in  a  pleasant  region  above  the  shy.  In  that 
region  they  were  happy,  there  being  neither  wicked 
men  nor  noxious  animals  to  make  them  afraid. 
Beautiful  birds  abounded,  and  were  the  game  of 
theii-  young  hunters.  One  of  these,  named  Okono- 
rote,  having  wandered  far  in  pursuit  of  a  choice 
bird,  discharged  an  arrow  at  it,  which  missed  its 
mark  and  disappeared.  While  searching  for  the 
arrow  he  found  a  hole  through  which  it  had  fallen, 
and  on  looking  through  it  he  saw  this  lower  world 
stretched  out  beneath,  with  herds  of  bush-hogs, 
numerous  deer,  and  other  animals,  feeding  and 
roaming  undisturbed  through  its  green  forests  and 
savannahs.  Finding  that  the  aperture  would  allow 
him  to  pass  through,  he  resolved  to  make  a  rope  or 
ladder  of  cotton,"  of  which  there  seems  to  have  been 
abundance  above,  "  and  descend.  Assisted  by  his 
friends,  he  at  length  completed  the  rope, — descended 
by  it,  and  again  with  infinite  labour  returned  to 
the  upper  regions ; — to  report  the  wondrous  things 
he  had  seen  (and  eaten)  below,  and  to  counsel  a 
migration  thither. 

"  The  Warau  race  listened  to  his  tale  of  unlimited 
animal  food  till  their  desires  and  apjDctites  could 
no  longer  be  controlled,  and  without  regarding,  as 
it  seems,  the  will  of  the  Great  Spirit,  they  unani- 
mously resolved  on  a  descent  to  the  terrestrial  hunting- 
grounds.     They   accordingly   descended   by  the  same 


390  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

means,  followed  by  tlieir  children  and  their  wives, 
all  except  the  last, — an  unfortunate  person  who,  being 
too  stout  to  squeeze  through,  remained  fixed  in  the 
narrow  aperture,  completely  filling  it.  No  efiectual 
assistance  could  be  given  from  below ;  and  as  none 
Avere  left  above  to  render  aid,  all  communication 
with  the  regions  above  the  sky  was  closed  by  her 
sad  mishap,  and  return  rendered  impossible.  The 
Waraus  were  thus  of  necessity  confined  to  this 
earth,  without  even  a  glimpse  of  their  former 
abode  ! 

"  They  found  the  lower  world  abundantly  supplied 
Avith  game,  but  water  was  scarce.  The  Great  Spirit, 
in  reply  to  their  supplications,  created  the  Essequibo 
and  other  streams.  Moreover,  he  formed  for  the 
Waraus,  his  dear  though  erring  children,  a  small 
lake  of  delicious  water,  charging  them  '  only  to  drink 
of  it,  but  not  to  loathe  therein,  or  evil  would  ensue.' 
This  was  the  test  of  obedience,  and  all  the  men 
religiously  observed  it, 

"Near  that  pleasant  spot  there  dwelt  a  fiimily  of 
note  among  the  Waraus,  consisting  of  four  brothers, 
named  respectively,  Kororoma,  Kororomana,  Kororo- 
matu,  and  Kororomatitu,  with  their  sisters  Korobona 
and  Korobonako,  The  latter,  two  beautiful  but  wilful 
maidens,  disregarded  the  injunction,  and  in  an  evil 
hour  ventured  into  the  forbidden  water.  In  the  centre 
there  was  planted  a  pole,  which,  while  it  remained 
untouched,  was  their  safeguard.  This  excited  their 
curiosity.  There  was  a  secret  which  they  must  find 
out.     The  boldest  of  the  two  at  last  ventured  to  shake 


MYTH  (>L  OG  Y  A  ND  LEGEND  A  B  Y  TA  L  ES.  -J  <)  1 

it,  and  thereby  broke  the  charm  which  had  Ixiiiiid 
the  spu'it  of  the  pool"  (who  seems  to  have  been  in 
nature  and  i^ropensities  very  like  a  river-god  of 
ancient  Greece),  "  and  he  immediately  took  possession 
of  the  maiden  as  his  lawful  prize. 

"Great  was  the  indici-nation  of  her  brothers  when, 
after  a  time,  their  sister  became  a  mother.  But  as 
the  babe  was  in  all  respects  like  one  of  their  own 
children,  they,  after  long  consultation,  allowed  it 
to  live  and  grow  up  with  them,  and  the  mother's 
offence  was  forgiven. 

"  She  could  not,  however,  forget  the  pleasant  pool 
and  its  mysterious  inhal)itant,  and  after  a  while 
repeated  her  transgression.  Then  came  the  threatened 
woe !  The  offspring  of  the  second  offence  only  re- 
sembled the  human  race  in  the  head  and  upper  parts, 
which  were  those  of  a  beautiful  boy."  Like  Milton's 
Sin,  though  of  the  opposite  sex,  this  childj  according 
to  the  Warau  legend — 

" ended  foul  in  many  a  snaky  fold," 


the  other  extremity  resembling  that  of  the  variegated 
python  or  camudi  of  the  rivers  and  swamps  of  Guiana. 
"  Though  terrified  at  the  appearance  of  her  off- 
spring, Korobona  yet  cherished  it  secretly  in  the 
depth  of  the  forest  where  she  had  brought  it  forth. 
Her  brothers  at  length  discovered  her  secret,  and 
transfixed  the  serpent-child  with  their  arrows,  leav- 
ino;  it  for  dead.  But  under  the  mother's  nursino; 
it  revived,  and  soon  grew  to  a  formidable  size.  The 
suspicions  of  her  brothers  liaving  l)een  again  aroused 


392  THE  INDIAN  TBIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

by  lier  frequent  visits  to  tlie  forest,  tliey  followed 
her,  and  from  a  distance  belield  her  conversing  mth 
it,  themselves  remaining  unseen. 

"  Fearing  that  they  would  themselves  he  eventually 
over^DOwered  by  a  creature  so  terrible,  which,  after 
what  had  happened,  must  naturally  look  on  them 
as  foes,  they  resolved  on  an  onslaught  with  all 
the  power  at  their  command.  Accordingly,  they 
made  many  arrows  and  put  their  other  weapons 
in  order.  Their  sister,  asking  the  purpose  of  those 
preparations,  received  an  evasive  answer.  On  this 
she  fled  to  give  warning,  and  they  pursued.  Attack- 
ing the  mysterious  being,  which  sought  refuge  in  its 
mother's  embrace,  they  disabled  it  from  a  distance 
with  showers  of  arrows,  and,  to  make  all  sure,  cut 
it  in  pieces  before  her  eyes. 

"  The  unhappy  Korobona  carefully  collected  the 
remains  into  a  heap,  which  she  kept  continually 
covered  with  fresh  leaves  and  guarded  with  tender 
assiduity. — After  long  watching,  her  patience  was 
rewarded.  The  veo-etable  coverino-  beo-an  to  heave, 
and  show  signs  of  life.  From  it  there  slowly  arose 
an  Indian  warrior  of  majestic  and  terrible  appearance. 
His  brow  was  of  a  brilliant  red,  he  held  bow  and 
arrows  in  his  hand,  and  was  otherwise  equipped  for 
instant  battle. 

"  That  warrior  was  the  first  Carib — the  o-reat 
father  of  a  powerful  race. 

"  He  forthwith  commenced  the  task  of  re  venose  for 
the  wrongs  suffered  in  his  former  existence.  Neither 
liis  uncles,   nor   the  whole  Warau   race  whom    they 


MYTHOLOGY  AND  LEGENDARY  TALES.  393 

siimmonecl,  could  stand  before  liim.  He  drave  tliem 
hither  and  thither  like  deer — took  possession  of  such 
of  their  women  as  pleased  him,  and  hy  them  became 
the  father  of  brave  and  terrible  warriors  like  himself. 
From  their  presence  the  unhappy  Waraus  retii-ed,  till 
they  reached  the  swampy  shores  of  the  Atlantic, 
forsaking  those  pleasant  hunting-grounds  which  they 
had  occupied  on  their  first  descent  from  heaven."-^ 

Such  is  the  Warau  account  of  the  early  history 
of  their  race.  I  was  amazed  to  hear  so  romantic  a 
legend  in  such  an  unexpected  quarter.  It  certainly 
does  credit  to  their  inventive  powers.  They  cover 
the  disgrace  of  defeat  most  adroitly,  by  making  their 
conquerors  to  be  of  their  own  race  as  far  as  they 
were  human,  and  on  the  other  side  of  supernatural 
descent,  and  consequently  invincible. — Their  high 
pretensions  to  a  celestial  origin  are  also  most  amusing 
when  viewed  in  connexion  with  their  very  low 
condition  and  general  scjualid  appearance. 

The  Warau  traditions  of  the  flood  are  of  little 
interest.  They  differ  from  those  of  other  tril^es 
chiefly  in  the  circumstance  that  the  survivors  saved 
themselves  by  a  large  woodskin,  and  made  trial  of 
various  kinds  of  trees  ere  they  decided  on  the  bark 
fittest  for  their  purpose. 

^  I  have  been  obliged  to  omit  certain  portions  of  the  above 
legend.  They  contained  nothing  of  importance  to  the  real  story, 
but  were  merely  foul  excrescences,  which  had  been  gradually  added 
by  the  grossness  of  their  minds.  Mj  informant  Avould  by  no  means 
suppress  them  when  requested,  saying  that  the  whole  tale  must  be 
repeated  just  as  it  had  been  handed  down  to  him. 


;394  THE  INDIAN  TBIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

The  "  woibaka,"  or  canoe,  of  Avliicli  tliey  are  such 
experienced  makers,  is  said  to  have  been  invented 
by  a  celebrated  Warau  named  Abore — the  first  man 
who  traversed  the  ocean.  Their  traditions  respecting 
this  personage  can  scarcely  be  surpassed  by  any 
in  point  of  extravagance.  The  following  are 
portions : — 

"  In  very  ancient  days  a  female  spirit  named 
Wowta,  of  evil  disposition,  wandered  among  the 
damp  places  of  the  earth  in  the  shape  of  a  huge  frog. 
She  at  length  thought  of  changing  her  figure  into 
that  of  a  woman,  that  she  might  obtain  possession 
of  Abore,  then  a  beautiful  little  boy.  Accordingly, 
having  assumed  the  form  of  a  Warau  matron,  she 
obtained  a  footing  in  his  family.  The  child  being- 
one  day  left  under  her  care  by  his  mother,  she  brought 
him  under  her  magical  power,  and  exerted  it  to  such 
an  extent  that,  by  her  vigorous  stretching  and 
skilful  handling,  he  grew  in  that  one  day  more 
than  he  would  have  grown  naturally  in  several 
years,  and  the  mother  on  her  return  did  not  know 
her  own  son." 

Passing  over  the  deaths  of  his  parents,  and  many 
minor  incidents  of  this  legend,  we  find  Abore  in  ripen- 
in  o-  manhood  the  slave  of  this  terrible  female.  He 
believes  her  to  be  his  mother,  but  is  undeceived  by 
a  friendly  spirit,  whom  he  finds  (also  in  the  shape  of  a 
woman)  sitting  alone  under  a  tree  in  the  shady  forest. 
She  informs  him  of  the  real  state  of  things,  and 
advises  him  at  all  risks  to  escape  from  thraldom.  He 
then  attempts  to  run  a^'ay,  but  is  invariably  tracked 


MYTHOLOGY  AND  LEGENDARY  TALES.  395 

and  broiiglit  back  by  Wowta.  He  next  tries  to  kill 
lier  by  caiisiDg  a  cocorite  palm  to  fall  upon  lier,  ])ut 
fails,  as  slie  is  not  mortal.  Finally,  unable  to  endure 
that  state  of  existence,  and  (according  to  some)  dis- 
gusted with  lier  design  to  many  him,  he  determines 
to  escape  across  the  great  salt  sea,  and  seek  some 
unknown  shore. 

"  But  neither  logs  of  wood  nor  pieces  of  bark  could 
bear  him  in  safety  over  the  mighty  waves  of  that 
great  ocean,  and  he  saw  that  some  other  means  of 
transit  must  be  provided.  Long  ruminating,  therefore, 
and  ex^^erimenting  on  the  subject,  he  at  last  hit  upon 
the  proper  shaj^e  of  a  vessel,  and  formed  a  canoe  of 
ivax,  a  material  which  excited  no  suspicion.  In  this 
he  was  just  preparing  to  embark,  when  his  vigilant 
mistress  came  upon  him,  seized  his  vessel  and  destroyed 
it ;    ruining  his  hopes  for  that  time. 

"  But  Wowta  had  a  great  fondness  for  honey,  and 
daily  sent  him  to  ransack  the  forest  for  fresh  supplies 
from  its  stingless  bees,  which  she  received  with  a  loud 
croak  of  delight,  a  relic  of  her  former  condition." 

The  narrator  here  paused  to  embellish  the  legend  by 
imitating  this  croak,  which  he  did  several  times  with 
much  apparent  relish  and  satisfaction. — He  then  went 
on  to  tell  how  Abore,  availing  himself  of  her  love  of 
sweets,  removed  the  wax  after  she  had  drained  it,  and 
laid  it  in  a  secret  plact;  as  material  for  another  canoe. 
Having  collected  enough,  he  one  day  took  AVowta  to 
a  hollow  tree,  and  showed  her  a  crack  from  which 
honey  was  dripping.  She  crept  into  the  tree  to 
regale  herself,  and  lie  immediately  wedged  her  in  so 


396  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

tiglitly  that  she  could  not  escape.  Then  rapidly 
forming  a  new  craft,  he  loaded  it  with  provisions, 
and  while  his  admiring  countrymen  observed  its 
shape,  he  bade  them  farewell,  boldly  jDacldled  out  on 
the  broad  ocean,  and  was  seen  no  more  in  AVarau  land. 

From  that  time  his  countrymen  became  skilful 
makers  of  canoes,  following  his  pattern,  but  changing 
the  material  from  wax  to  wood. 

"  AVowta,  imprisoned  in  the  hollow  tree,  from  which 
none  would  set  her  free,  at  length  abandoned  the 
human  form,  and  returned  to  her  original  shape  as 
a  huge  frog.  In  this  she  still  wanders  through 
swamps  and  marshy  forests.  The  Waraus,  when, 
in  their  nightly  bivouacs  among  the  ita  palms,  they 
are  sometimes  startled  by  a  sudden  croak  of  preter- 
natural loudness,  know  well  that  it  is  the  miserable 
Wowta,  vainly  seeking  her  handsome  runaway  slave, 
and  inconsolable  for  the  loss  of  him. 

"  Abore  safely  reached  the  other  side  of  the  great 
sea.  There  he  found  a  people  with  white  skins, 
destitute  of  the  necessary  comforts  of  life  enjoyed  by 
the  Waraus,  and  altogether  in  a  very  barbarous  con- 
dition. The  genius  which  in  its  first  essay  had  taught 
his  countrymen  how  to  shape  a  vessel  which  could  ride 
over  the  waves,  now  undertook  the  benevolent  task 
of  enlightening  the  benighted  white  people.  He 
invented  and  taught  them  all  the  useful  arts,  of 
which  they  are  now  so  proud,  showed  them  how  to 
use  the  metals  which  their  country  produced,  and 
to  him  their  clever  manufacturers  owe  all  their  skill 
and  power  to  get  wealth." 


MYTHOLOGY  AND  LEGENDARY  TALES.  397 

This  is  not  all,  "  By  virtue  of  tlic  magical  power 
exerted  over  liiiii  in  infancy  and  youth,  his  life  has 
been  preserved  during  many  generations.  Abord 
still  lives  beyond  the  great  salt  sea,  the  head  of  all 
rich  merchants  there.  Ever  mindful  of  his  origin, 
and  of  the  wants  of  his  poor  countrymen,  he 
continually  sends  shiploads  of  such  things  as  their 
country  cannot  supply.  But  such  is  the  liad  faith 
of  those  to  whom  these  valuable  articles  are  con- 
sioned,  that  for  a  lono-  time  the  Waraus  have  not 
received  them  as  presents.  On  the  contrary,  they  are 
now  obliged  to  j:)«y  for  every  knife,  axe,  cutlass,  or 
j)iece  of  calico  they  get  ;  while,  as  to  guns, — they  are 
altogether  beyond  the  reach  of  most.  Yet,  inde- 
pendently of  the  commands  of  Abor^,  common  grati- 
tude for  the  benefits  their  race  has  received  from  him 
should  lead  the  whites  to  supply  the  poor  Waraus, 
his  brethren,  with  all  such  things  free  of  charge." 

After  this  rather  audacious  wdnding-up,  the  reader 
will  probably  not  be  surprised  to  learn  that  my 
informant  asked  me  for  a  shirt,  nor  that  the  recep- 
tion of  the  shirt  was  followed  by  requests  for  a 
formidable  list  of  other  articles.  It  seemed  as  if 
the  tale  had  been  invented  on  the  spot  as  an  excuse 
for  unlimited  begging^.  But  such  was  not  the  case. 
By  examining  other  Waraus  separately,  I  heard  the 
same  in  substance.  The  legend  of  Abore  is  certainly 
one  of  the  most  popular  among  them,  though  there 
are  considerable  variations  (as  in  all  Indian  tales), 
according  to  the  district  or  family  of  the  narrator. 
The  first  part  is  evidently  very   ancient ;    the  latter 


398  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

must  have  been  added  since  white  men  became 
known  to  them.  The  annual  presents  formerly 
received  from  the  colonists  have,  as  we  see,  been 
idready  ingeniously  fitted  into  their  mythology.^ 

With  a  brief  notice  of  the  traditions  of  the  Aratvdks, 
we  will  conclude  the  subject. 

Their  ancient  belief  that  man  and  other  living 
creatures  w^ere  formed  by  the  Supreme  Being  out  of 
pieces  of  bark  or  wood  has  been  already  mentioned. 

They  also  believe  that,  since  the  Creation,  the  world 
has  been  tivice  destroyed ;  first,  by  a  flame  of  fire 
sent  to  sweep  over  it,  and  afterwards  by  a  flood 
of  water.  Each  of  those  destructions  was  on  account 
of  the  evil  doings  of  men,  and  specially  threatened 
by  Aiomun  Kondi,  the  great  "  Dweller  on  High." 

"  Those  men  who  believed  the  warning  of  the  coming 

^  It  must  have  been  pleasant  for  the  Indians,  during  the  last 
century  and  the  early  part  of  the  present,  to  lounge  around  a  post- 
holder's  residence,  and  have  guns,  iron  implements,  salempores, 
heads,  &c.,  annually  distributed  among  them.  But  that  system  of 
disarming  animosity  and  securing  allegiance  greatly  fostered  their 
native  indolence. 

Their  forefathers,  with  only  rude  stone  implements,  must 
of  necessity  have  been  more  industrious.  At  any  rate,  they 
had  to  exert  infinitely  more  labour  in  clearing  land,  making 
canoes,   &c. 

The  present  generation  have  to  purchase  by  the  fruit  of  their  o^\^l 
labour  the  articles  which  Avere  formerly  given,  and  many  other 
things  which  the  influence  of  IMissions  has  taught  the  Christian 
Indians  to  consider  indispensable.  And  this  is  the  only  way  to 
teach  them  self-reliance.  A  return  to  the  system  of  presents  (were 
it  possible)  would  be  pernicious  in  its  consequences,  and  most 
obstructive  to  the  spread  of  true  Christian  principles  among 
them. 


MYTHOLOGY  AND  LEGENDARY  TALES.  ?,[)[) 

fire  dug  deep  into  a  sand-reef,  and  formed  a  retreat 
therein,  consisting  of  a  roof  of  timber,  supported 
by  massive  pillars  of  the  same.  This  they  covered 
with  Layers  of  earth,  and  a  thick  U2)per  coating  of 
sand.  Having  removed  everything  combustible  from 
the  neighbourhood,  they  then  remained  cpiietly  in 
their  subterranean  abode,  till  the  flame  which  swept 
the  earth's  surface  had  passed  by  them. 

"  When  the  great  waters  were  about  to  be  sent, 
a  chief  of  distinguished  piety  and  wisdom,  named 
]\Tarerewana,  was  informed  of  the  coming  flood,  and 
saved  himself  and  his  family  in  a  large  canoe. 
Being  desirous  not  to  drift  over  the  ocean,  or  far 
from  the  home  of  his  fathers,  he  had  j^repared  a 
cable  of  '  bush-rope'  of  great  length,  and  with  it 
he  tied  his  bark  to  the  trunk  of  a  large  tree.  When 
the  waters  subsided,  he  found  himself  not  far  from 
his  former  abode." 

A  comparison  of  this  last  tradition  Avith  those  of 
the  other  tribes  on  the  same  subject  shows  us  a 
belief,  among  all,  in  the  main  fact  that  a  great 
flood  of  waters  once  overspread  the  earth.  Of 
that  general  belief  there  can  be  no  dispute.  The 
reader  may  see  it  in  the  traditions  here  collected 
from  the  various  races  which  dwell  in  our  province, 
within  tAvo  or  three  hundred  miles  of  the  Atlantic 
coast,  while  travellers  show  its  existence  in  the  veiy 
heart  of  the  continent. 

"  The  belief  in  a  great  deluge  is  not  confinrd 
to  one  nation  singly  ;  it  makes  part  of  a  system 
of  historical    tradition,   of    which    we   find   scattered 


400  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

notions  among  the  Maypures  of  the  great  cataracts ; 
amonoj  the  Indians  of  the  Rio  Erevato,  which  runs 
into  the  Caura,  and  among  almost  all  the  tribes  of 
the  Upper  Orinoco/'^  The  rude  nations  of  South 
America  agree  in  this  with  the  aborigines  of  the 
West  Indian  islands,  with  the  ancient  Mexicans, 
and  the  other  races  of  the  north.  At  the  same  time 
we  see  that  while  all  agree  in  the  main  fact,  each 
nation  has  its  own  peculiar  account  of  the  circum- 
stances attending  it ;  which  accounts,  coming  through 
various  channels,  and  receiving  from  eacli  tribe  a 
local  colouring,  differ  as  widely  from  each  other  as 
they  do  from  the  narrative  of  Holy  Scripture. 

While  investigating  the  practices  of  the  Indian 
sorcerers,  during  the  earlier  years  of  my  residence 
among  them,  I  was  at  a  loss  to  understand  the 
source  from  whence  the  use  of  the  rattle  and  other 
parts  of  their  strange  system  could  have  arisen. 
It  seemed  evident  that  they  must  be  based  on  some 
ancient  legend,  but  none  were  willing,  or  dared,  to 
communicate  that  legend  to  me. 

An  old  semi-cici  of  the  Arawaks,  who  bore  the 
appropriate  name  of  "  Maraka-kore"  (the  red-rattle), 
became  one  of  our  catechumens  in  1841.  As  he 
was  the  great  oracle  of.  his  tribe,  I  used  frequently 
to  question  him,  and  derived  much  curious  informa- 
tion, which  it  was  only  in  the  power  of  an  aged 
man  of  his  class  to  communicate. 

Having  one  day  begged  him  to  tell  me  what 
were  their  real  ideas  of  the  origin  of  their  system, 

1   Humboldt. 


MYTHOLOG  Y  A  ND  LEG  END  A  R  Y  TA  LEl^.  401 

after  some  reluctance  he  complied.  The  following 
tradition  was  then  delivered  in  the  presence  of 
several  persons,  and  interpreted  by   their  chief: — 

"  In  very  ancient  times  the  yauhahii,  being  unre- 
strained in  their  practices,  inflicted  continual  misery 
on  mankind,  causing  not  only  great  affliction,  such 
as  sickness,  but  perpetual  annoyance  in  other  ways, 
even  destroying  their  food,  and  defiling  their  cooking- 
utensils.  An  Arawak,  named  Arawcinili,^  was  walking 
by  the  water  side,  brooding  over  the  condition  to 
which  men  were  reduced,  when  a  female  figure,  the 
Orehu,  arose  from  the  stream,  bearing  in  her  hand 
a  small  branch,  which  she  presented  to  the  man, 
desiring  him  to  plant  it,  and  afterwards  gather  its 
fruit.  He  did  so,  and  thus  obtained  the  calabash, 
till  then  unknown  among  them.  She  again  emerged 
from  the  water  with  small  white  stones  in  her 
hand,  which  she  desired  him  to  enclose  in  the  gourd, 
in  tlie  manner  before    descriljcd.      After    instructino* 

o 

him  in  the  mysteries  of  semecihi,  she  again  retired 
to  her  watery  abode.  He  followed  her  directions, 
and  thus  became  the  founder  of  that  system,  which 
has  since  prevailed  among  all  the  Indian  tribes." 

On  my  incjuiring  where  Arawanili  was  now,  and 
whether  he  had  not  ''  long  ago  died  like  other  men  ?  ' 
the  old  man  said  that,  according  to  their  belief,  "  he 
ivent  up,  and  did  not  die." 

I  then  asked  if  he  knew  where  those  events  were 

^  Orowama,  according  to  some ;  others  say  that  those  names 
belong  respectively  to  two  individuals,  the  elder  of  many  brothers, 
who  all  became  great  sorcerers. 

D   D 


402  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

supposed  to  have  liappened  ?  He  replied,  "  Not  in 
this  land,  but  at  Kaieri"  (an  island),  pointing 
with  his  hand  to  the  northward. —  The  tradition 
showed  that  this  tribe  had  in  former  ages  some 
connexion  with  the  islands,  and  did  not  entirely 
confine  their  abode  to  Terra  Firma  or  Guiana. 

It  is  worthy  of  note  that  many  of  the  persons 
whom  the  traditions  of  the  various  ancient  races  of 
America  jjoint  out  as  lawgivers,  founders  of  insti- 
tutions, or  benefactors  of  their  respective  nations, 
are  said  to  have  departed  from  among  their  people 
in  some  mysterious  way. 

Quetzalcoatl,  famous  among  the  people  of  ancient 
Mexico  ; — Nemterequeteba,  whom  the  partially  civi- 
lized Muyscas  of  New  Granada  called  "  the  mes- 
senger of  God  ; " — Amalivaca,  once  venerated,  as  we 
have  seen,  in  the  vast  countries  through  which  the 
Orinoco  flows,  are  all  said  to  have  departed,  after 
fulfilling  their  work,  to  some  unknown  region,  from 
which  they  were  believed  to  have  originally  come. 
While  in  the  mythological  tales  of  the  less  noted 
tribes  of  Guiana,  as  the  Arawaks  and  Acawoios,  their 
celebrated  personages  having  each  in  his  own  way, 
according  to  Indian  ideas,  benefited  mankind,  finally 
depart  by  "  going  up"  in  some  mysterious  manner. 
Whether  this  "  going  up"  be  part  of  the  pure  and 
original  traditions  existent  before  intercourse  with 
Europeans,  or  have  been  derived,  through  the  latter, 
from  the  accounts  given  of  Enoch  and  Elijah  in  the 
Old  Testament,  or  from  that  in  the  New,  in  which 
we  see — 


MYTHOLOGY  AND  LEGENDARY  TALES.  403 

"Cliiist,  awhile  to  mortals  given, 
Ee-asccncI  His  native  heaven," 

it  would  be  difficult  to  decide.  The  people  from 
wliom  I  licard  those  legends  had  certainly,  when  I 
first  knew  them,  no  knowledge  whatever  of  the  Holy- 
Scriptures. 

In  concluding  this  subject,  I  may  remark  that  the 
Indians  with  whom  I  have  conversed  all  maintain 
the  Invisibility  of  the  Eternal  Father.  In  their 
traditionary  legends  they  never  confound  Him  — 
the  Creator, — the  "  Ancient  of  Heaven' — with  the 
mythical  personages  of  what,  for  want  of  a  Ijetter 
term,  we  must  call  their  heroic  age  ;  and  though 
their  sorcerers  claim  familiarity  with,  and  power  to 
control,  the  inferior  (and  malignant)  spirits,  none 
would  ever  pretend  to  hold  intercourse  with  Him, 
or  that  it  were  possible  for  mortal  man  to  behold 
Him. 

To  the  solemn  declaration  of  the  inspired  Baptist, 
"  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time,"  the  heathen 
Indians  of  Guiana  readily  assent.  It  is  for  us  to 
teach  them  that  "  God,  who,"  as  they  already  rightly 
believe,  "  made  the  world  and  all  things  therein," 
"  the  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth,"  is,  though  unseen, 
"  not  far  from  every  one  of  us ; "  that  "  the  only 
begotten  Son  hath  declared  Him ; "  and  to  say  to 
each  soul  now  distressed  and  in  bondage  to  the  terroi's 
of  their  many  superstitions : — 

"Acquaint  now  thyself  with  Him,  and  be  at 
peace." 

D  D  2 


CHAPTER  XL 


REVIEW. 


Diversity  of  Language  among  the  Aboriginal  Tribes — Other  Tnipedi- 
nients  to  Improvement — Favourable  IJesults  of  tlie  Introduction 
of  Christianity  among  them. 

The  diversity  of  languages  among  tlie  Indian  nations 
of  America  lias  been  often  noticed,  and  it  is  as 
strongly  marked  in  Guiana  as  in  any  other  part  of 
tlie   Western  world. 

In  Eastern  Polynesia  the  dialects  of  islands  thousands 
of  miles  apart  have  sprung  from  a  common  original, 
and  do  not  very  greatly  differ.  But  it  is  far  other- 
wise with  the  country  and  races  we  have  endeavoured 
to  describe.  Four,  or  even  five,  very  dilferent  tongues 
may  sometimes  be  heard  at  the  same  place. ^ 

Even  the  most  common  birds  and  animals  are  called 
by  different  names.  The  jaguar,  for  instance,  is  called 
by  the  Arawaks,  arua ;  by  the  Waraus,  tohl ;  and 
by  the  Caribs,  haikusl.  This  diversity  of  tongues 
has  been  an  obstacle  to  the  advancement  of  the 
Indians,  only  to  Ije  overcome  by  the  gradual  spread  of 
our  laiio;iuio;c  amono;  them. 

^  See  Note  at  the  end  of  this  chapter. 


REVIEW.  405 

Other  (lifficiiltiGS  iii  tlie  way  of  inlp^o^•ement• — as 
the  systematic  opposition  of  their  sorcerers, — the 
Kanaima  (not  always  an  empty  menace),  —  the 
hereditary  jealousy  of  the  different  races, — and  their 
migratory  habits,  we  have  already  noticed.  To  them 
we  may  add  the  very  great  impediment  offered  L}' 
the  vices  of  nominal  Christians,  which  the  Indians 
witness  and  are  tempted  to  imitate,  and  from  whicli 
they  morally  and  physically  suffer. 

Notwithstanding  these  drawbacks,  and  others  whicli 
our  narrative  has  shown,  the  spread  of  Christianity 
has,  by  God's  blessing,  had  many  cheering  results 
amono-  the  aborigines  of  Guiana. 

As  regards  man's  duty  to  God  his  Maker,  the  effect 
of  the  instruction  given  has  Ijeen  shown  in  the  number 
of  worshippers  baptized  and  married,  and  by  the 
many  miles  (hundreds  in  numerous  instances)  which 
they  Avho  formerly  neither  worshipped  nor  cared 
for  God  have  travelled  to  partake  of  Divine  ordi- 
nances. Indians,  naturally  and  proverbially  indolent, 
would  not  have  done  so  had  they  not  felt  their 
exceeding  value.  And  the  greatest  enemy  of  Chris- 
tian Missions  may  perhaps  admit,  that  neither 
savage  nor  civilized  man  will  voluntarily  take  great 
pains  and  labour  to  follow  that  which  is  indifferent 
to  him. 

So  also  with  respect  to  man's  duty  to  his  neighbour. 
The  dim'umtion  of  crime  among  the  aboriginal  races 
in  proportion  to  the  spread  of  Christian  knowledge 
among  them  has  been  noticed  and  recorded  by  one 
whose  official   position  enabled    him  to   speak    with 


406  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GVIANA. 

authority  on  that  head.     His  words,  already  quoted,^ 
need  not  be  repeated  here. 

There  are  other  marks  of  elevation  and  improve- 
ment, visible  to  all  who  know  them,  though  of 
secondary  importance. 

In  the  early  part  of  this  century  the  late  Mr. 
Waterton  stated  that  not  a  single  Indian  in  ci- 
devant  Dutch  Guiana  could  read  or  ivrite.  That 
reproach  has  long  since  ceased. 

They  also  wdio  were  formerly  unclad^  now  clothe 
themselves  from  head  to  foot ;  and  while  the  heathen 
of  both  sexes,  fresh  from  their  forest  homes,  have  even 
to  this  present  date  visited  our  public  places  in  a 
state  of  almost  complete  nudity,  causing  shame  and 
disgust,  nothing  would  induce  an  Arawak  Christian 
woman  to  appear  in  such  a  condition.  Many  of  their 
families  now  have  washing-tubs,  irons,  &c.  ;  and  their 
females  may  be  seen  practising,  not  unskilfully,  the 
art  of  the  laundress.  Those  things  all  cost  money, 
and  that  is  only  procured  by  industry  and  labour, 
which  benefit  others  as  well  as  themselves. 

It  may  not  be  amiss  to  endeavour  to  give  the 
reader  some  idea  of  the  gradual  change  of  Indian 
taste  in  this  respect,  as  I  have  seen  it  in  hundreds  of 
instances. 

The  first  garment  which  the  wild  man  of  the  woods 
purchases  is  generally  (but  not  always)  a  shirt.  This 
he  wears  till  it  be  ready  to  drop  off,  and  he  then  buys 
a  new  one,  which  he  puts  on  over  the  other  to  appear 
in  at  church.     It  sometimes  happens  that  the  new  one 

^  Part  II.  cliap.  iii. 


REVIEW.  407 

is  the  shorter,  and  the  effect  is  then  more  striking 
than  becoming.  I  have  seen  a  Carib  with  a  flowered 
waistcoat,  and  with  no  other  covering  than  his  native 
ck)th,  strut  about  with  much  complacent  vanity.  By 
degrees,  the  example  of  others  is  followed  ;  he  even 
endures  the  torture  of  sJioes,  and  appears  clothed  from 
top  to  toe. 

The  belle  of  the  forest,  whose  only  attire  has  been 
a  small  apron  and  necklaces  of  beads,  with  a  few 
ornaments  of  silver,  and  the  teeth  of  the  jaguar, 
when  she  begins  to  assume  an  attire  better  suited 
to  our  ideas  of  decency,  shows  more  avidity  to 
possess  clothes  than  taste  in  putting  them  on.  The 
Caribi  women  seemed  at  first  to  think  that  they 
never  could  wear  enough.  The  face,  hands,  and  bare 
feet  alone  were  visible,  the  rest  appearing  a  confused 
heap  of  printed  cotton  handkerchiefs,  &c.  of  the  most 
glaring  colours, — huge  balloons  (one  of  which  nearly 
covered  the  front  of  the  body)  being  at  one  time  the 
most  fashionable  pattern.  Accustomed  from  their 
birth  to  unrestrained  freedom  of  limb  and  body, 
those  poor  women  were  evidently  most  uncomfort- 
able in  their  unusual  attire. 

The  Arawak  females  more  readily  adopted  civilized 
apparel,  and  set  the  example  of  great  neatness  to  those 
of  other  tribes. 

But  these,  though  not  unimportant,  are  external 
things.  In  order  to  see  how  fully  the  Indian  shares 
with  other  men  in  the  rich  blessino-s  which  the  reliofion 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  bestows,  his  character  and  condition 
require  to  be  closely  observed.     And  these,  in  reality, 


408  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

differ  much  from  tlie  pictm'c  formed  in  the  imagina- 
tion of  many.  The  life  of  "the  noble  savage  "  running 
*'  wild  in  woods "  is  invested  with  a  certain  charm 
by  the  novelist  and  the  poet;  and  unc[uestionably 
there  is  a  charm  in  such  a  life,  and  much  enjoyment 
for  the  noble  savage,  while  young  and  healthy,  in 
managing  the  light  canoe,  or  pursuing  his  game 
through  the  forest.  But  it  is  animal  enjoyment 
merely,  and,  like  all  such,  fades  under  the  pressure 
of  hunger  or  at  the  approach  of  sickness.  When  the 
Indian  falls  sick  (which  in  Guiana  is  very  frecpiently), 
he  has  neither  comfort  nor  consolation  ; — his  super- 
stition, far  from  supporting,  teaches  him  that  his 
sickness  and  pain  are  the  torments  inflicted  by  an  evil 
spirit,  which  has  taken  possession  of,  and  is  slowly 
destroying  him  ; — while  of  the  Supreme  Being,  as  tJie 
God  that  lieareth  pnfyer,  he  knows  nothing.  When 
the  sorcerer,  whom  he  has  summoned,  fails  to  relieve 
him  by  incantations,  he  finds  himself  shunned  by  his 
friends,  who  fear  lest  they  should  be  the  next  victims. 
Those  friends,  better  taught,  would  be  kind  and  affec- 
tionate ;  it  is  superstition  that  in  this,  as  in  other 
things,  hardens  the  heart. 

But  in  the  hour  of  sickness,  pain,  and  sorrow,  the 
comfort  of  the  religion  of  Christ  is  truly  felt.  The 
assurance  that  affliction  is  sent  by  a  loving  Father  to 
bring  us  nearer  to  Himself,  and  that  through  the 
grave  and  gate  of  death  we  pass  to  a  joyful  re- 
surrection and  eternal  life,  is  as  full  of  comfort  to  the 
Indian  dying  in  his  hammock  as  to  the  Christian 
of  another  race  expiring  in  his  bed. 


JtEVIEW.  -  409 

Some  years  ago  we  lost  one  of  our  most  steady 
converts  by  the  bite  of  a  labaiia  snake.  He  was 
named  Hendrick  Yanke.  AVliile  following  his  game 
through  the  forest  he  put  his  foot  close  to  the  reptile 
Avithout  perceiving  it,  and  it  immediately  struck  him 
with  its  poisonous  fangs.  I  saw  him  three  days  after- 
wards. He  Avas  in  great  agony — his  foot,  leg,  and 
the  whole  of  his  rioht  side  beino;  swollen  to  an  enor- 
mous  size.  He  said  that  he  had  "  shot  the  snake 
to  pieces"  at  once,  and  that  "a  dark  cloud"  then 
came  before  his  eyes.  After  a  little  time  his  sight 
returned  sufficiently  to  enable  him  to  crawl  to  his 
house,  which  was  close  by.  He  thought  that  as  he 
had  survived  so  many  hours  he  might  recover. 

He  did  apparently  recover,  and  was  able  to  go 
about,  but  the  poison  had  thoroughly  tainted  his 
blood,  and  he  soon  began  to  droop.  He  journeyed 
to  the  coast  to  seek  medical  assistance,  l)ut  it  was 
of  no  avail.  A  large  abscess  formed  on  each  side  of 
the  spine,  and  he  began  to  show  signs  of  approaching 
dissolution.  A  little  before  his  death  he  came  to  the 
Mission,  where  all  manifested  much  sympathy  for 
him.  When  I  last  spoke  to  him,  his  eyes,  filled  with 
tears  as  he  looked  on  his  young  children,  showed  the 
natural  feelino-  within, — 

"  These  bind  to  earth ;  for  these  I  pray  to  live." 
But  he  expressed  his  resignation  to  the  will  of  God. 
— Poor   Hendrick   died    eight   months   after   he    had 
received  the  bite. 

His  only  surviving  brother  was  l^itten  by  a  labaria 
soon  after.     He  was  with  another  Indian  hunting  far 


410  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

from  home ;  and  wlieii  tlic  accident  occurred,  liis 
companion,  being  nnable  to  carry  liim,  slung  his 
hammock  between  two  trees,  placed  him  in  it,  and 
hurried  to  seek  assistance.  All  night  the  poor  sufferer 
lay  there,  exposed  to  the  perils  of  the  forest,  yet  still 
survived.  The  next  day  his  friends  arrived,  and  bare 
him  to  his  house  by  means  of  a  stout  rod  to  which 
his  hammock  was  slung.  He  was,  like  his  departed 
brother,  a  Christian ;  was  much  comforted  when 
visited,  and  received  the  Holy  Sacrament.  His  aged 
parents  were  present,  and  their  grief  was  excessive. 
They  implored  me  to  tell  them,  if  I  could,  whether 
tliis,  their  '^  last  son,  would  die!"  The  limb  was 
enormously  swollen,  though  tiic  puncture  of  the  ser- 
pent's fang  was  almost  imperceptible ;  but  after  he 
had  taken  a  strong  decoction  of  sarsaparilla,  which 
I  was  able  to  supply,  a  large  hole  formed  about  an 
inch  from  the  bite,  which  continued  to  discharge 
profusely  for  many  weeks,  after  which  he  recovered 
his  health  comjDk^tely. 

We  are  convinced,  from  what  we  have  often  wit- 
nessed, that  the  heart  of  the  apparently  apathetic  red 
man  is  very  susceptible  of  affectionate  and  tender 
feeling,  when  better  influences  have  overcome  his 
superstitious  fears. 

The  wife  of  one  of  the  small  party  of  Maiongkongs, 
who  had  joined  the  ]\Iission  at  Waramuri,  died  in 
ISGG  at  a  settlement  on  the  Waini,  many  miles 
distant.  Her  husband  and  friends  knew  that  it  had 
been  her  wish  to  l>e  buried  with  Christian  rites  near 
the  chapel  in  which  she  had  been  a  A^'orshipper  and 


REVIEW.  411 

communicant.  Tlicy  accordingly  brought  licr  body 
in  a  canoe,  meeting  witli  such  obstacles  in  forcing 
their  way  across  the  half-dry  swamps,  that  they  did 
not  bury  it  luitil  the  fifth  day,  by  which  time  it  was 
in  a  fearful  state  of  decomposition.  This  was  an 
instance  of  endurance  which  few  (who  know  the 
ejffect  of  the  hot  and  humid  climate  on  a  corpse  in 
twenty-four  hours  only)  could  have  believed  possible. 
We  may  question  theii"  prudence,  considering  the  risk 
they  ran,  but  of  the  pious  and  loving  feeling  which 
upheld  them  there  can  be  no  doubt ;  and  it  formed 
a  striking  contrast  to  that  superstitious  terror  which, 
among  their  heathen  countrymen,  sometimes  leads 
to  abandonment  even  before  death. 

Polygamy,  the  great  source  of  their  domestic 
troubles,  is  -of  course  prevented  by  Christian  matri- 
mony. When  before  God,  and  in  the  presence  of 
the  congregation  of  the  people  of  his  tribe,  an  Indian 
has  vowed  to  keep  to  one  wife,  the  woman  is  from 
that  time  delivered  from  the  constant  apprehension 
of  a  future  rival.  Well  then  may  those  women 
thankfully  say,  as  they  do,  of  Christian  marriage, 
"  It  is  a  good  thing." 

Their  position  is  raised,  and  they  are  better  treated. 
The  heathen  Indians  often  treat  their  wives  harshly; 
and  it  is  nothing  unusual  to  see  Warau  and  Caribi 
women  paddling  continuously,  while  theii'  husbands 
amuse  themselves  with  a  stroke  now  and  then.  But 
as  the  power  of  Christianity  is  felt,  so  woman  rises 
to  her  proper  place  ;  and  though  still  obliged  to  work 
hard,  it  is  only  in  what  she  considers  her  appropriate 


412  THU  INDIAN  TBIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

duties.  She  still  plants  the  field,  and  bears  the  best 
])art  of  the  household  utensils  to  and  from  the  canoe. 
This  may  seem  to  us  a  hardship,  but  they  do  not 
consider  it  as  such.  Customs  and  habits  of  feeling 
vary  in  diflerent  countries.  I  once  desired  a  man  to 
take  a  heavy  bunch  of  plantains  off  his  wife's  head, 
and  to  carry  it  himself.  He  did  so  with  a  smile, 
but  his  wife  seemed  hurt  at  what  she  considered 
a  deofradation  of  her  husband.  She  seemed  to  feel 
much  as  the  wife  of  one  of  our  own  labourers  would, 
who  should  see  her  husband  compelled  by  some 
023prcssive  tyrant  to  scrub  the  floor  and  wash  the 
clothes  of  the  family.  The  wives  of  Christian  Indians, 
like  those  of  our  own  poor,  must  still  lead  a  life  of 
labour,  but  there  is  a  manifest  improvement  in 
their  condition  ; — they  are  not  looked  on  as  mere 
servile  beings. 

The  system  of  sorcery,  inveterate  and  deeply 
rooted  in  the  minds  of  the  Indians  of  every  tribe,  has 
doubtless  been  the  greatest  obstacle  to  their  reception 
of  Christianity.  Yet  some  of  our  earliest  and  most 
stedfast  converts  were  of  the  dreaded  class  of  Piai-men. 
Two  of  them  l)roke  their  marakkas,  or  sacred  rattles, 
before  joining  us.  Others  surrendered  theirs  in  pledge 
of  their  renunciation  of  the  practice.  The  old  man, 
Maraka-kore,  who  related  to  nic  their  tradition  con- 
cerning the  Oreliu,  was  the  first  who  did  so.  Five 
of  those  magical  implements  thus  came  into  my 
possession  at  diff'erent  times,  some  of  which  were 
Imng  up  in  tlic  Mission-school,  that  the  young  people, 
by  familiarity   ^\■itll    them,    might    learn    to    despise 


REV  IE]]'.  413 

tlieir  pretended  power.  Occasionally  the  children 
AYOuld  be  amused  by  seeing  the  nervous  apprehen- 
sion of  some  heathen  stranger  \\\\o,  paying  us  a  visit, 
would  suddenly  and  unexpectedly  find  his  head  in 
close  proximity  to  such  dreaded  instruments.  The 
other  gourds  were  sent  to  England,  and  two  of  them 
presented  to  the  Missionary  College  of  St.  Augustine 
at  Canterbury/ 

INIany  a  life  which  would  have  been  thrown  away 
under  the  noise,  excitement,  and  tobacco  vapour 
of  the  piai  system  has,  under  God,  been  saved  at 
our  stations  by  the  use  of  proper  remedies  hi  sick- 
ness. Keluctant  as  all  Indians  are  to  take  medicine, 
experience  of  its  etticacy  reconciles  them  to  its  use, 
and  the  number  of  deaths  is  thereliy  diminished. 
Many  little  children  are  now  also  reared,  who  under 
the  old  savage  way  of  life  would  have  .died  in  the 
forests,  and  on  those  long  journeys  to  which  their 
strength  is  by  no  means  equal.^ 

^  By  the  Eev.  T.  j\Iudland,  vicar  of  Steyniiig,  to  whom  they 
had  been  sent,  in  grateful  acknowledgment  of  many  services  to 
our  Missions  his  early  pastoral  care,  and  personal  kindness  to 
myself  and  others  of  the  missionaries. 

"  The  aboriginal  population  of  Guiana  was  undoubtedly  much 
larger  formerly  than  it  is  at  present,  but  we  can  hardly  suppose 
that  it  was  ever  veri/  dense,  even  before  Europeans  settled  on  their 
shores.  The  Avars  and  predatory  habits  of  tribes  so  diflTering  in 
language  and  character  must  from  time  to  time  have  thinned  tlieir 
numbers  j  and  their  way  of  life,  all  being  hunters,  and  each  fixmijy 
requiring  a  certain  tract  to  range  in,  would  prevent  their  living 
together  in  large  communities. 

Their  women  are  prolific,  but,  owing  to  their  uncivilized  way  of 
life,  only  a  comparatively  small  proportion  of  their  cliildren  arrive 
at  maturity.     The  adults  have  been  thinned  by  frequent  epidemics 


414  THE  INDIAN  TlilBES  OF  GUIANA. 

In  the  foregoing  narrative  we  liave  had  to  record 
various  trials  and  vicissitudes. 

We  have  noticed  the  extinction  of  Missions  which 
during  the  last  century  were  very  prosperous,  and 
have  seen  more  recently  the  work  of  the  English 
Church  at  Pirara  and  Urwa  Rapids  brought  violently 
to  an  end.  We  have  also  seen  the  light  thus  extin- 
guished break  forth  in  other  places  in  God's  good 
time  and  way. 

Of  all   existing   Missions   our  expectations  should 

and  intemperate  habits,  rum  having  been  the  great  bane  to  those 
who  lived  near  or  visited  the  plantations. 

During  the  last,  and  the  early  part  of  the  present  century,  their 
numbers  everyv>^here  diminished.  And  this  decrease,  in  certain 
districts,  as  the  Corentyn,  has  gone  on  to  this  date  (1868).  Other 
districts,  on  the  contrary,  have  increased  their  Indian  population, 
especially  those  in  which  Christianity  has  been  most  favourably 
received. 

On  the  shores  of  the  Ituribisi  the  number  of  Indians  in 
1844  was  139.  In  October  186.5,  during  a  missionary  visit 
to  that  beautiful  lake  by  the  Rev.  C.  Morgan  and  myself, 
365  were  comited  by  Miss  Austin,  who  introduced  us  to  her 
people.  That  increase  was  both  by  births  and  immigration  from 
other  districts. 

Among  the  few  Acawoio  families  who  from  18.53  to  1865  lived 
secluded  at  the  Pomeroon  Mission,  there  was  in  those  years  a 
natural  increase  from  58  to  83,  the  births  having  numbered  oo 
and  the  deaths  10.  This  increase  was  unfortunately  checked  in 
1866-7,  by  famine  and  sickness,  the  result  of  a  general  failure  in 
the  cassava  crop.  The  most  industrious  Indians  were  then  suffering 
want,  but  the  scarcity  came  early,  and  with  the  greatest  severity  on 
the  Acawoios  at  our  stations,  whose  fields  had  been  exhausted  by 
their  hospitality  during  the  great  influx  of  their  countrymen,  related 
in  chapter  v.  The  coming  of  those  inquirers  was  also,  to  our  deep 
regret,  checked  thcreliy,  large  parties  having  tm'ned  back  when  half 
way  on  lioaring  that  there  was  starvation  before  them. 


REVIEW. 


415 


be  very  moderate,  while  doing  our  best  aud  praying 
for  tlieir  success,  as  is  our  Christian  duty.  We  Imow 
from  ex2jcrience  how  many  things  have  power  to 
depress,  and  even  to  crush  them.  But  we  also  know 
full  surely  that  the  work  must  still  go  on,  and  God's 
pm-pose  be  accomplished,  whether  they,  having  borne 
their  witness  for  Him  among  the  nations,  be  swept 
away, — or  (as  we  rather  trust,  and  in  many  places 
behold)  become  centres  of  Christian  districts,  changing 
their  Mission  character  l)y  the  fulness  of  success. 


!N'oTE. — The  following  short  vocahulaiy   wiU  show  the  difFerence 
in  the  languages  of  neishhouring  tribes  in  Guiana  : — 


English. 

Arawak. 

Warau. 

Caribi. 

Acawoio. 

Sun 

Adaili 

Ya 

Weyii 

Wiyenu 

Moon 

Kaci 

Wanika 

Nuno 

Kapui 

Star 

Wiwa 

Hura 

Sidlgyu 

Sirigyu 

Fire 

Ikihi 

Eykuuo 

Watu 

Ahpoh 

Water 

Oniabu 

Ho 

Toiia 

Tona 

Rain 

Oini 

Xaha 

Kunobo 

Tona 

Stone  or  Rock 

Siba 

Hoeyii 

Toubo 

Touk 

Sand 

Motogo 

Kaheuiura 

Sakou 

Wotsuk 

Island 

Kaieri 

Hota-borolio 

Pahu 

Opahwo 

Man 

Wadili 

Nebora 

Wakuri 

Wariaio 

Woman 

Hiaro 

Tida 

W(jri 

Orichan 

(My)  Head 

Da' si 

Ma'qua 

U'bopo 

U'bopai 

(My)  Hand 

Da'kabo 

Ma'niuho 

U'enari 

U'yunzai'i 

House 

Bawhu 

Anoko 

Owtuli 

Owteh 

One 

Abar 

Ishakka 

Ohi 

Tegina 

Two 

Biaina 

Manani 

Oko 

Azara 

Three 

Kabuin 

Dianam 

Oi'oa 

Osorowa 

Four 

Bibici 

Orabakaia 

Okobairae 

Azagrene 

Five 

Abar-dakabo 

Moabass 

Unyatone 

Miararoo-pukin 

Six 

Abar-timen 

Moniatani-sliakka 

Ohi-yopeniako 

TL'gina-niiararoe 

Seven 

Biam-timen 

Momatani-nianain 

Oko-yopeniako 

Azare-niiararoe 

Eight 

Kabuin-timen 

Momatani-dianam 

Oroa-yopeuiako 

Osorowa-miaiaioc 

Nine 

Bibici-timen 

M  oniatani-orabakala 

Okobaime-yopemako 

Azagiene-niiaiaroe 

3c  n 

Biain-dakabo 

Mohorcko 

Uiiyabatura 

Miararo-niara 

416  TI1\E  IXDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

Of  the  above  languages,  that  of  tlie  Arawaks,  as  has  been  before 
observed,  is  most  remarkable  for  its  softness.  It  abounds  in  vowels, 
and  from  the  manner  in  which  the  words  combine  with,  and  ruu 
into  each  other,  it  is  very  difficult  for  a  learner  to  acquire  it.  Hence 
there  is  a  proverbial  saying,  that  "  Xone  can  thoroughly  master 
their  tongue,  unless  his  mother  were  one  of  the  lol-ono."  The  people 
of  this  tribe,  inhabiting  the  various  river  districts,  have  in  each 
locality  certain  peculiarities  of  speech,  but  those  differences  are 
small,  and  in  all  important  points  the  language  is  the  same. 

The  Warau,  or  Guarano,  tongue  is  more  easily  acquired  than  any 
other,  its  words  being  comparatively  few,  and  very  distinctly  pro- 
nounced. It  is  used,  not  only  by  the  Waraus  themselves,  through 
the  immense  swampy  region  inhabited  chiefly  by  them,  from  the 
Pomeroon  to  and  beyond  the  Delta  of  the  Orinoco,  but  also  by  the 
tribes  which  dwell  around  them,  as  a  common  medium  of  com- 
munication. 

The  Caribi  tongue,  though  somewhat  more  guttural  than  either 
of  the  above,  is  spoken  in  a  smart  vivacious  manner.  Those  with 
whom  I  had  more  immediate  intercourse  claimed  to  speak  it  in  its 
purity,  and  regarded  as  corrupt  the  language  of  those  Caribs  who 
elsewhere  had  intermarried  with  other  races. 

The  Acawoio  tongue,  as  may  be  seen  above,  bears  a  strong 
resemblance  to  the  Caribi,  but  has  even  a  closer  affinity  to  the 
dialects  of  the  remoter  tribes  of  the  interior.  The  Acawoios  readily 
understand  the  Caribs,  but  are  not  as  easily  understood  by  them. 
Their  language  has  considerable  variation,  owing  to  the  vast  extent 
of  territory  over  which  it  is  spoken.  Of  all  the  native  tongues  it 
seems  the  most  dilHcult  fcir  a  stranger  to  pronounce  ;  and  there  are 
in  it  some  sounds  which  no  combination  of  the  letters  of  the 
English  alphabet  can  accurately  express.  This  tongue  is  spoken  on 
the  upper  parts  <if  all  our  large  rivers,  from  the  Corentyn  to  the 
Orinoco. 

From  the  small  comparative  vocabulary  given  above,  it  will  be 
seen  how  the  Arawak  and  Warau  tongues  differ  from  each  other, 
and  from  the  rest.  The  dissimilarity  observable  in  words  extends 
also  to  many  points  in  their  grammatical  construction.  Eut,  though 
in  many  things  there  is  a  wide  distinction,  there  are  others  iu 
■which  all  the  Indian  dialects  of  Guiana  seem  to  agree. 

For  instance,  the  words  which  have  the  power  of  prepositions  in 
English,  always  follow  tlie  noun  or  pronoun  to  which  they  refer. 


JN'Or^  ON  THE  INDIAN  LANaUA'lES.  4  17 

This   will   be  seen   in  the   following  examples,   tlii-    Avorils  vliii^li 
answer  to  our  prcijosition  being  in  italics  : — 

Englisli — On  earth, 

Arawak — Ororo  ajeago, 

Waran— Hota'  rai, 

Caribi — Xoano  ko2io, 

-Acawoio — JSTolin  ho.  -        ' 

Another  point  in  Avhich  the  dilFerent  nations  agree  is  their 
method  of  numeration.  The  first  four  nnmbers  are  represented  by 
simple  words,  as  in  the  table  above  given.  Five  is  "  my  one. 
hand,"  ahar-dal-abo  in  Arawak.  Then  conies  a  repetition,  abar-timen, 
hiam-timen,  Arc,  up  to  nine.  Biam-dahaho,  "my  two  hands,"  is 
ten.  From  ten  to  twenty  tliey  use  the  toes  [kuti  or  okuti),  as 
ahar-Jcuti-bana,  "  eleven,"  biam-kufi-hana,  "  twelve,"  &c.  They 
call  twenty  abar-lol'o,  one  lol:o  or  man.  They  then  proceed  by 
men  or  scores  ;  thus  forty-five  is  laboriously  expressed  by  biam-loko 
abar-dakabo  tajeago,  "  two  men  and  one  hand  upon  it."  For  higher 
numbers  they  have  now  recourse  to  our  words  liundrcd  and 
thousand. 

This  method  of  numeration  prevails  among  the  different  tribes  as 
far  as  my  researches  have  extended. 

The  Indian  children,  who  learn  to  read  and  write  with  facility, 
and  comprehend  with  no  great  ditiiculty  the  elementary  instruction 
given  thorn  in  geography,  etc.,  are  most  backward  in  acquiring 
the  simplest  rudiments  of  arithmetic.  The  imperfect  and  barbarous 
method  of  reckoning  by  Iiauds,  feet,  and  complete  men,  wliich  each 
learns  with  his  mother  tongue,  is  a  formidable  obstacle  to  the 
acquirement  of  our  decimal  system. 

The  American-Indian  languages  mostly  belong  to  what  has  been 
called  i\i& iwlysynthetic  class,  and  are  well  known  to  be  very  different 
in  structure  from  the  European  tongues.  In  some  of  them  words 
arc  abbreviated  and  combined  in  a  manner  that  to  us  appears  con- 
fused and  embarrassing,  but  which  is  really  full  of  order  and 
method. 

The  Arawi\k  language,  though  of  course  not  to  bo  compared  with 
oiu'  own  in  the  number  of  its  words,  has  considerable  power  of  ex- 
pression, and  its  A'erbs  arc  very  rich  in  moods  and  tenses.  It  would 
be  out  of  place  to  attempt  here  any  explanation  of  its  structure  ; 

E   E 


4  18  THE  IN VI AN  TltlBEH  OF  GUIANA. 

but  it  may  be  l)riefly  observed,  that  its  complexity  is  greatly  in- 
creased by  a  system  of  regimen  which  pervades  it,  and  in  various 
ways  affects  different  parts  of  speech, — the  governed  words  almost 
always  ending  with  the  letter  n.  The  sentences  lajlagoha  tohojin 
and  tohojia  la-goha-ajian  have  precisely  the  mme  meaning,  "  he 
spake  thus  ;"  but  in  the  former  the  verb  governs  the  adverb,  which 
follotvs  it,  Avhile  in  the  latter  the  adverb  irrecedlncj  governs,  and 
entirely  changes  the  form  of  the  verb.  There  are  other  changes 
of  form  in  each  conjugation,  according  to  the  nature  and  position 
of  the  governing  word. 

Some  of  the  Indian  words  are  of  great  length,  and,  though  not 
quite  so  extensive  as  those  used  by  certain  tribes  of  the  Northern 
continent  (among  whom  polysyllables  stretching  across  a  page  are 
not  uncommon),  are  yet  sufficient  to  dismay  a  learner.  Among 
the  AraAVclks,  sucli  words  as  lohohorohwatoasia,  "his  thought"  or 
"remembrance;"  kabidntimen-kutihanano,  "eighteen,"  &c.,  are 
continually  used.  The  length  of  their  verbs  is  increased  by  the 
manner  in  Avhich  the  pronouns  are  combined  with  them  ;  and 
sometimes  also  from  the  syllables  whicli  contain  the  root  of  the 
verb  being  doubled,  to  express  the  continuance  or  intensity  of  the 
action.  In  nahadadadikiiagobai,  "they  continued  asking  him" 
(pronounced  by  the  Arawaks  as  a  single  word),  the  reduplication 
may  be  observed,  and  both  the  nominative  and  objective  pro- 
nouns (each  expressed  by  a  single  letter)  are  contained. 

In  those  long  words,  almost  every  syllable  would  be  found  to 
have  its  own  particular  force  and  meaning,  though  some  to  us  maj^ 
appear  redundant.  For  example,  an  Arawak  says  simply,  Dai-ii/u, 
"  my  mother  ; "  but  Wa-iyu-na-tu,  our  mother.  To  us  the  sense 
of  this  latter  word  Avould  appear  sufficiently  expressed  by  the  hrst 
two  syllables  wa  and  iyu,  w'hich  are  respectively  "  our"  and 
"mother."  But,  as  if  the  idea  of  plurality  (of  offspring)  were 
not  sufficiently  expressed  by  the  first  syllable,  the  Indian  repeats 
it  in  the  jienultimate  na,  and  closes  the  word  with  tu,  the  usual 
singular  feminine  termination.  So  also  in  the  Caribi  word,  he- 
yoboturi-lcun,  which  signifies  "our  lord."  Yahoturi  is  equivalent 
to  "  lord "  or  "  ruler,"  and  the  idea  of  plurality  in  those  whom 
he  rules,  which  the  first  syllable  conveys,  is  rejieated  in  the  last. 
Tiie  Acawoio  form  of  the  same  word,  /iiyoboforikioi  ;  and 
ki/iaibiniiknii,  by  which  tliey  express  ••(H'.r  fullier,''  arc  exactly 
similar  in  tlieir  construction. 


NOTE  ON  THE  INDIAN  LANGUAGEfi.  419 

To  enter  further  into  this  subject  wouhl  exceed  our  limits  and 
■weary  the  reader.  It  may  be  suthcient  to  observe  that  the  remarks 
made  by  a  laborious  investigator  ^  on  the  American  native  lan- 
guages in  general  will  be  found  to  hold  good  of  more  than  one  now 
moribund  in  Guiana  : — ''They  are  rich  in  words  and  grammatical 
forms,  and  in  their  complicated  construction  the  greatest  order, 
method,  and  regularitt/  prevail." 

Many  Avords  of  Spanish  origin  have  been  added  to  those  of  the 
aboriginal  languages.  They  are  the  names  of  objects  -with  which 
the  Indians  were  unacquainted  previously  to  their  discovery  by 
that  nation.  Thus  they  call  a  goat  kabaritu,  and  a  fowl  karina, 
from  the  Spanish  words  cabarita  and  gcdlina.  Sapatu,  their  word 
for  shoe,  is  from  the  Spanish  zapato  ;  and  from  arcabiiz  comes 
arakabusa,  which  the  Indians  apply  to  fire-arms.  In  like  manner, 
several  Dutch  words,  more  or  less  altered,  are  now  incorporated 
with  the  natiA^e  tongues. 

^   Mr.  Du  Ponceau. 


E    1-:    1 


CHAPTER  XII. 

THE    SHELL   MOUNDS    OF    GUIANA. 

The  Tumulus  on  Waramiiri  Hill — Causes  -wliicli  led  to  its  Excava- 
tion— Found  to  consist  of  Shells  and  broken  Bones — Human 
Eemains — Their  Condition — Search  for  other  Mounds — The 
Governor's  Visit — Incidents — Tumulus  cut  through  to  its 
Base — Other  Mounds  discovered  and  examined  near  the 
Pomeroon,  "Waini,  &c. — The  Evidence  of  their  Contents. 

In  tlie  course  of  the  foregoing  narrative  we  Lave 
more  tlian  once  noticed  tlie  tumnkis  on  the  l3ro\v  of 
the  sand-reef  at  Waramuri.  From  the  establishment 
of  that  Mission  in  1844-5,  when  the  reef  and  mound 
were  cleared  of  trees,  the  latter  had  been  an  object  of 
interest  to  the  five  or  six  civilized  visitors  who  had 
reached  that  secluded   spot. 

The  sand-reef,  which  is  extensive,  rises  to  a  height 
of  eighty  or  ninety  feet  above  the  level  of  the  swamp. 
It  contains,  as  far  as  we  have  seen,  no  organic 
remains.  At  one  part  it  is  precipitous,  and  on  that 
spot  stood  the  tumulus,  swelling  upwards  with  a 
graceful  curve  to  the  height  of  about  twenty  or 
twenty-five  feet  more.  The  diameter  of  its  base  was 
about  one  hundred  and  thirty  feet.  Its  surface,  when 
first  cleared,  was  found  to  be  composed  of  shells, 
(Inefly  periwinkle,  embedded  in  a  rich  mould. 


THE  SHELL  MOUNDS  OF  GUIANA.  421 

From  tlie  symmetry  of  its  outline,  I  liad  at  first 
thought  that  it  was  a  sepulchral  barrow,  containing 
the  remains  of  some  great  chief,  or  of  warriors  fallen 
in  battle.  But  this  idea  was  relinquished,  for  shells 
v.'ere  strange  material  for  a  sepulchral  mound  ; — the 
sand-reef  contained  none — and  the  sea,  ten  or  twelve 
miles  away,  seemed  the  nearest  place  whence  they 
could  have  been  procured.  It  was  also  evident  that 
no  power  possessed  by  an}'  wild  Indian  tribe  could 
suddcnii/  have  collected  and  brought  together  such  a 
mass  from  a  distance.  The  throwing  up  of  so  large 
a  mound,  and  of  such  singular  materials,  must  have 
extended  over  a  number  of  years.  Moreover, 
broken  bones,  which  were  found  mixed  with  the 
shells,  seemed  to  be  the  relics  of  meals. 

We  incpiired  of  the  Indians,  but  they  knew  no 
more  than  we  of  the  mound  or  its  origin ;  and  so  it 
remained  for  more  than  twenty  years, ^ — a  pleasant 
place  from  which  to  look  over  the  surrounding  forest, 
and  enjoy  the  cool  evening  breeze,  when  the  day's 
work  was  over, — but  a  standing  puzzle  to  all. 

The  accounts  which  at  length  appeared  in  the  pubhc 
press  of  the  exploration  of  shell-heaps  in  various  parts 
of  Europe  seemed  to  me  to  throw  a  ray  of  light 
upon  the  origin  of  this.  Could  it  be  that  (notwith- 
standing the  great  distance  of  place  and  perhaps 
of  time)  the  early  inhabitants  of  the  coast  of  Guiana 
were  of  similar  haljits  with  the  people  whose  remains 
are  found  on  certain  bleak  parts  of  the  shores  of  the 
Old  "World  ? — And  could  this  l^e  a  refuse  heap,  or 
^'  kitchen-midden,"  similar  to  theirs  ? 


422  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

Thinking  that  a  search  within  the  mound  might 
clear  up  the  mystery,  and  perhaps  reveal  something 
of  the  habits  of  an  ancient  race,  I  requested  Mr. 
D.  Campbell,  the  resident  teacher,  to  engage  Indians 
to  excavate  it,  a  few  days  previous  to  my  visit,  in 
November  1865.  Mr.  Campbell  accordingly  com- 
menced operations  by  a  cutting  of  twenty  feet  in 
width  at  the  top,  to  allow  of  a  gradual  narrowing  in 
the  descent. 

The  mass  of  the  mound  we  found  to  consist  chiefly 
of  shells.  There  were  those  of  mussels,  &c.,  in 
infinite  number,  and  the  large  claws  of  crabs  were 
very  abundant,  with  comminuted  particles  of  their 
shells ;  but  the  periwinkle,  with  its  black  and  white 
stripes  very  distinct  through  age,  far  exceeded  all 
the  rest  in  cjuantity.  Those  shells  were  found  dis- 
posed in  layers,  which  indicated  by  their  streaks, 
or  slight  varieties  in  colour,  where  each  deposit  had 
been  spread  forth.  The  fragmentary  bones  of  verte- 
brate fishes  and  land  animals  were  also  found  mingled 
with  them  throughout  the  heap.  The  whole  pre- 
sented the  appearance  of  having  been  the  refuse  of 
innumerable  meals  of  some  race  with  whom  shell-fish 
must  have  been  a  chief  article  of  food. 

The  Indians  worked  willino;ly  enouo;li  in  throwing 
out  the  above,  as  well  as  some  hard  slabs  of  clayey 
suljstance,  which  resembled  the  baking-pans  or  plates 
used  by  the  wilder  trilies  at  the  present  day,  and 
which  the  shells,  &c.,  plentifully  adhered  to  and 
encrusted. 

But  they  had  not  dug  f;ir  into  the  mass  when  they 


THE  SH?:LT.  mounds  of  GUIANA.  428 

were  startled  by  coming  upon  human  bones,  in 
irregular  positions,  and  at  unequal  depths. 

Those  bones  were  not  found  stretched  out,  either  in 
horizontal  or  perpendicular  positions,  but  huddled  and 
jumliled  together  in  a  manner  impossible  to  describe. 
The  skulls,  some  of  which  were  of  great  thickness, 
were  in  fragments ; — the  long  bones  had  all  been 
cracked  open  and  contained  sand  and  dust,  Each 
mass  appeared  to  have  been  deposited  without 
ceremony  in  the  common  heap.  There  they  had 
become  welded  into  singular  clusters  during  the  lapse 
of  years.  An  elbow  bone,  for  instance,  was  found  so 
tightly  fixed  in  the  spinal  vertebrae,  that  the  brittle 
substance  would  break  ere  they  could  l)e  sej^arated. 
Bones  from  various  parts  of  the  body,  and  in  some 
instances  of  more  than  one  body,  were  dug  up  in 
masses,  which  also  had  fish-bones  and  shells  adherino- 
to  and  consolidated  with  them.  Scarcely  any  were 
found  in  natural  juxtaposition. 

Our  Indians  having  dug  up  the  bones  of  several 
adults,  came  upon  the  remains  of  an  unfortunate  little 
child.  One  side  of  its  head  had  been  beaten  in,  and 
the  other  bones  broken  open.  At  that  sight  they  left 
their  work,  and  could  not  be  induced  to  resume  it. 
They  feared  that  supernatural  vengeance  would  over- 
take them  for  disturbing  those  remains  ;  and  though 
they  allowed  me  to  make  a  selection  from  them  for 
examination  by  scientific  men  in  Georgetown,  it  was 
only  on  the  express  condition  that  every  bone  should 
be  brought  back  again,  which,  I  scarcely  need  say, 
was  fulfilled. 


424  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GLIAI^A. 

TogX'tlier  with  those  poor  human  relics,  several 
heads  of  stone-axes,  or  tomahawks  (most  of  them 
broken),  were  dug  up,  and  a  sharp-edged  stone, 
which  mig-ht  have  been  used  as  a  knife  ;  also  several 
lumps  of  a  red  earthy  substance,  which  our  Indians 
said  must  have  been  used  as  paint.  AVe  also  found 
a  singular  rod-like  petrifaction,  and  the  vertebral 
joints  of  fishes  of  great  size.  The  Indians  made 
no  o])jection  to  our  removing  these,  but  were  very 
uneasy  at  liaving  meddled  with  the  liuman  re- 
mains ;  or,  as  they  said,  "  troubled  the  bones  of 
the  old-time  people." 

Those  apprehensions  were  increased  by  a  fever 
which  seized  one  of  the  diggers,  and  they  rose  into 
a  panic  when  another  man,  who  was  at  the  time 
sick  unto  death,  became  delirious  (his  mind  having 
prol)al)ly  been  excited  by  the  talk  around  him)  ; 
and,  eluding  the  vigilance  of  his  friends,  was  found 
wanderino;  by  nioht  in  the  cuttino;. 

The  heathen  sorcerers  then  said,  "The  bones  of 
the  dead  have  been  disturbed,  and  their  spirits  are 
beginning  to  seize  you  as  victims."  Their  words 
seemed  confirmed  l)y  the  death  of  the  sick  man,  after 
which  no  Indian  would  touch  a  shovel  there. 

The  excavation  had  been  undertaken  vritli  no 
expectation  of  finding  human  remains.  We  were  as 
much  sur})rised  as  the  Indians  (and  probably  more 
shocked)  at  the  discovery.  But  having  thus  strangely 
aud  uiiexpet'tedly  come  upon  them,  it  was  desmible 
to  continue  the  work.  By  doing  so  we  should  at 
iuiy   rate    combat    superstitious    fears,    and   probably 


THE  SHELL  MOUNDS  OF  GUIANA.  425 

find  somctliing  vrliieli  miglit  clear  ii])  llie  inystcry 
of  the  presence  of  those  relics,  antl  their  singularly 
shattered  condition. 

The  labour  necessary  to  enable  us  to  do  this  came 
from  an  unexpected  quarter.  Soon  after  my  depar- 
ture there  arrived  at  that  Mission  another  horde  of 
the  Kapolm,  or  Acawoios,  from  the  head  "waters  of 
the  Masaruni.  They  were  a  singular  and  interesting 
party,  eighty-three  in  numljer,  who,  following  the 
example  of  the  Arecunas  and  others  in  the  beginning 
of  that  year,  had  undertaken  a  journey  of  some  weeks 
to  hear  something  of  the  religion  of  Christ.  They 
had  with  them  three  venerable-looking  patriarchs, 
whose  beards,  white  and  long  (a  strange  sight  in  an 
Indian),  showed  extreme  old  age.  Three  young 
men  of  this  party,  being  either  free  from  supersti- 
tious fears,  or  fancying  that  they  should  soon  be  on 
their  return  far  out  of  the  reach  of  the  s})irits,  con- 
sented to  die;  in  the  intervals  of  instruction.  Mr. 
Campbell,  v.'ith  much  energy,  carried  on  the  work  by 
their  aid,  until  he  got  down  to  within  seven  or  eight 
feet  of  the  base  of  the  mound.  He  found  the  same 
shells,  with  human   and    other  bones, -^  as  above,  but 

^  Among  the  relics  found  in  this  second  digging,  was  a  chistcr 
of  small  size,  but  of  remarkable  variety.  A  medical  friend,  Dr. 
Goring,  at  my  request,  carefully''  examined  and  pointed  out  to 
me  the  various  iragments  of  ■which  it  is  composed. 

It  consists  of  a  portion  of  the  head  and  net!:  of  a  femur  of  small 
size,  fixed  to  tlie  lower  jaw-bone  of  an  adult,  and  a  confused  mass, 
composed  chiefly  of  the  spinous  processes  of  the  vertebra?,  aj)parcntly 
dorsal,  and  others  belonging  to  the  cervical  region.  "Welded,  as  it 
were,  into  the  same  mass,  are  portions  of  the   sphenoid  and  upper 


426  THE  INDIAN  TBIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

the  mass  at  that  depth  was  scarcely  penetrable  by 
the  shovel,  being  hardened  almost  into  stone  by  the 
superincumbent  weight. 

When,  in  the  first  part  of  the  excavation,  human 
remains  were  found  within  a  few  feet  of  the  surface, 
we  thought  it  possible  that  they  might  have  been 
interred  there  by  friendly  hands  (as  in  a  spot  con- 
spicuous and  easily  recognisable)  perhaps  at  a  period 
long  after  the  mound  had  been  formed.  Their 
dislocation  might,  we  thought,  be  accounted  for  l)y 
the  well-known  fact  that  several  tribes,  now  existing, 
used  to  preserve  the  skeletons  of  their  deceased 
relatives  for  a  long  time  before  burying  them. 
Occasionally  also  they  tinged  the  bones  with  red 
by  way  of  respectful  adornment,  which  might  perhaps 
have  accounted  for  the  red  earthy  lumps  found  in 
the  heap.     This  was  our  Jirst  idea. 

But  it  was  impossible  to  explain,  by  any  sup])osi- 
tion    of  respectful   or    decent    interment,   the    broken 

jaw-bones,  teeth,  the  grinding  surfaces  of  which  are  worn  flat  and 
smooth  (as  is  the  case  with  most  of  the  other  human  teeth  dug  up), 
broken  pliahxnges  (of  the  toes  apparently),  shells,  sand,  and  the 
broken  ends  of  the  bones  of  birds.  Like  the  other  relics,  it  is 
exceedingly  biiltle,  crumbling  rapidly,  and  very  light,  the  Aveight 
of  the  mass  being  only  seven  ounces. 

That  cluster  Avas  found  low  in  the  mound,  and  must  have  been 
an  early  deposit.  From  this  description  of  one  specimen  some 
faint  idea  may  be  formed  of  the  manner  in  which  those  poor 
remains  of  humanity  had  been  treated. 

It  appeared  also  from  the  positions  in  which  some  of  the  long 
bones  were  found,  firmly  fixed  in  the  larger  masses  or  clusters, 
that,  though  broken  open,  in  several  instances  they  had  not  been 
severed  from  each  other  at  the  large  joints,  but  merely  doubled  or 
twisted  one  upon  the  other  before  they  were  cast  aside. 


THE  SHELL  MOUNDS  OF  GUIANA.  427 

condition  of  those  relics,  the  violence  with  which 
they  had  been  treated,  or  the  apparent  contumely 
with  which  they  had  been  cast  into  the  common 
receptacle  for  refuse  matter.  The  great  depth  at 
which  we  found  many  of  those  remains  also  seemed 
a  convincing  proof  that  they  had  not  been  deposited 
after  the  completion  of  the  shell  heap,  but  rather 
during  its  accumulation.  An  old  Indian,  with  whom 
I  discussed  the  matter,  expressed  the  opinion  of  his 
people  very  plainly.  "  That,"  said  he,  "  is  the  way 
in  which  the  nations  who  used  to  eat  men  always 
broke  open  the  bones  to  get  out  the  marrow.  So 
our  fathers  have  told  us."  We  knew  well  that 
cannibalism  had  anciently  prevailed  in  those  lands, 
but  this  aggravated  form  of  it  was  so  revoltino-  that 

DO  O 

it  was  not  until  relic  after  relic  had  been  brought 
to  light,  all  in  the  same  state,  that  the  Indian 
explanation  was  reluctantly  admitted  to  be  the 
most   probable. 

The  Caribs,  with  whom  this  is  rather  a  sore  point, 
anxiously  assured  me  that  they  "  knew  nothing  what- 
ever about  the  mound,  and  that  their  fathers  had 
never  lived  in  its  neighbourhood."  Their  assertion 
was  doubtless  true.  The  race  which  formed  it  may 
perhaps  have  passed  away  ere  the  Caribs  became 
powerful  and   overran   the  land. 

It  at  first  seemed  strange  that  the  refuse  heap 
should  have  been  formed  on  the  highest  and  most 
conspicuous  part  of  the  hill.  But  the  reason  became 
apparent  when  we  considered  the  nature  of  the 
locality.     A   little  distance  behind  is  a  small  spring, 


428  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

or  230ol  of  clear  water,  from  wliicli  I  liacl  drunk 
Avlien  the  river  was  salt  and  the  s^^'amJ)s  dry,  in 
1846.  The  mound-makers  must  have  dwelt  on  the 
■sandy  plain  in  front  of  this,  and  at  first  thrown 
their  refuse,  shells  and  bones,  not  on  the  hill,  but 
<lown  the  steep  declivity.  Eesting  and  accumulating 
iigainst  the  hill-side,  they  at  length  rose  above  the 
Ijrow,  where  successive  additions  formed  the  mound 
we  saw. 

Assuming  that  the  mound  had  been  thus  raised 
lij  an  ancient  race,  it  seemed  unlikely  that  Waramuri 
should  have  been  their  only  place  of  residence.  And 
if  they  were  more  widely  spread,  then  other  mounds, 
the  result  of  similar  habits,  would  be  in  existence 
on  the  edges  of  swamps  elsewhere.  Being  desirous 
to  ascertain  this,  I  sent  out  a  party  to  explore.  A 
young  black  man  named  Hamburgh,  who  had  been 
brought  up  at  the  Pomeroon  Mission,  was  entrusted 
with  that  duty,  and  instructed  to  measure,  and  bring 
specimens  of  shells,  &c.  from,  any  similar  mound 
he  might  discover.  Accompanied  and  assisted  b}' 
the  Arawaks,  whose  language  he  sj'ioke,  he  searched 
both  east  and  west  of  the  Pomeroon  river,  but  at 
first  without  success.  Cornelius,^  who  had  a  dim 
recollection   of  having  come    upon  a  heap   of  shells 

■^  That  good  old  chief,  whose  name  has  been  often  mentioned  in 
tliese  pages,  was  then  drawuig  near]  the  end  of  his  conrse  ;  -wliich, 
from  the  day  when  he  (first  of  aliyds  countrymen  in  that  quarter) 
cmhraced  the  religion  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  had  been  a  most  useful 
one.  Probably  few  men  m  humble  life  ha-\'e  worked  with  more 
simple  earnestness  for  God's  glory,  and  the  good  of  their  country- 
jueii,  than  Hiat  pnov  Tudiau. 


THE  SHELL  MOUNDS  OF  GUI  AN  J.  429 

while  hunting  in  his  yonngov  days,  endeavoured  to 
guide  liini  to  the  spot,  but,  from  age  and  recent 
sickness,  his  strength  faih3d,  and  lie  had  to  return. 
This  was  a  disappointment ;  but  the  young  man 
was  both  desirous  to  gratify  his  old  master,  and 
ambitious  of  success ;  and,  with  a  little  encourao'C- 
ment,  I  induced  him  to  undertake  a  second  expedition, 
and  after  that  a  third. 

Meanwhile,  reports  of  the  opening  of  the  mound 
at  Waramuri  had  o'ot  abroad  in  GeorQ-etown  and 
elsewhere,  some  of  which  assumed  the  most  amusing 
and  fantastic  shapes.  Certain  gentlemen,  however, 
who  were  informed  of  the  circumstance,  attached 
importance  to  the  relics  thus  brought  to  light.  His 
Excellency,  Governor  Hincks,  having  seen  the  speci- 
mens, and  read  the  account  sent  to  Archdeacon 
Jones,  forwarded  a  copy  of  the  latter  to  the  Colo- 
nial Secretary,  and  undertook  to  have  the  explorations 
completed  in  an  efficient  manner.  He  afterwards,  at 
our  request,  kindly  consented  to  visit  the  Mission, 
and  meet  our  Indians  in  person. 

That  visit  accordingly  took  place  in  the  end  of 
February  186G.  The  Governor,  accompanied  by  the 
Bishop  and  a  party  of  gentlemen,  left  Georgetown  hy 
sea. for  the  mouth  of  the  Moruca ;  and  the  next  day 
they  were  conveyed  by  Mr.  M'Clintock  in  bateaux  and 
canoes,  and  attended  by  a  large  Indian  flotilla  to  the 
Mission.  There  they  were  received  by  the  Archdeacon, 
Mr.  Campbell  and  myself,  and  vrelcomcd  by  a  Jeu 
(le  joie,  and  lou<l  cheers  from  a  f;ir  greater  number  of 
Indians  than  had  been  seen  too-ether  in  tliose  countries 


430  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

during  the  present  century.  The  school-children, 
bearing  banners,  and  having  their  ranks  lengthened 
by  a  great  number  of  little  naked  Warau  and  Caribi 
recruits,  lined  one  side  of  the  wide  path,  with  the  men 
ranged  behind  them  :  while  the  women  and  infants 

o  ^ 

occupied  the  other  side.  The  Governor  and  three 
gentlemen  of  his  suite  appeared  in  full  uniform,  a 
circumstance  which  gave  immense  delight  to  the 
assembled  multitude. 

After  an  interval  of  rest  during  the  noon-tide  heat, 
the  Indians  again  assembled  on  the  plain  before  the 
new  chapel.  The  pressing  forward  of  all,  men,  women 
and  childi^en,  to  shake  hands,  was  now  resumed  with 
increased  vigour,  and  endured  with  much  patience  by 
the  Governor,  who  afterwards  expressed,  in  a  few 
words,  his  pleasure  at  meeting  such  numbers  of  tlie 
various  tribes  as  were  there  assembled.  He  also  an- 
nounced his  wish  to  explore  the  mound  still  further. 
To  this  the  chiefs  assented,  as  the  work  was  to  be 
done  by  black  men  brought  for  the  purpose.  As  no 
tribe  knew  anything  of  the  origin  of  the  mound,  or 
would  acknowledge  affinity  with  the  people  whose 
bones  were  there  found,  none  cared  particularly  about 
their  being  disinterred  for  examination,  if  the  risk 
of  offending  their  manes  were  incurred  by  strangers, 
not  hy  themselves. 

The  next  day  there  was  a  distribution  of  presents, 
which  the  Governor  had  brought.  In  the  evening 
games  of  archery,  and  foot-races  among  the  school- 
children, took  place.  Some  wild-looking  Waraus  then 
brought  forward  their  ischi,  or  decorntcd  sliichls,  and 


THE  SHELL  MO UNDS  i >F  ii  U£A NA.  431 

eiiofaofecl  in  friendly  contests  with  each  other  for  the 
entertainment  of  the  visitors.  Many  severe  struggles 
took  place,  in  some  of  which  the  unsuccessful  Indian 
rolled  on  the  sand  ;  one  champion,  by  a  peculiar  and 
dexterous  manoeuvre,  overturning  three  antagonists 
in  succession. 

The  total  number  of  Indians  present  was  about 
2,000.  About  250  more  were  on  their  way  from 
Barima,  but,  being  too  late,  turned  back  again. 

The  unusual  excitement  of  the  day  was  followed 
by  the  calm  quiet  of  a  glorious  moonlight  night,  the 
stillness  of  which  was  broken  by  the  low  hum  of  voices 
from  the  multitude  housed  or  encamped  over  hundreds 
of  fires  around,  and  by  the  occasional  sound  of  a 
hymn  sung  by  our  Christian  Acawoios,  who,  with 
their  usual  perseverance,  were  holding  one  of  their 
religious  meetings  for  the  instruction  of  their  wilder 
brethren.^ 

^  The  following  is  an  extract  from  a  more  particular  account  of 
the  Governor's  visit,  by  the  Hon.  J.  L.  Smith  : — 

"  In  the  evening  the  sound  of  singing  was  heard  from  the 
Acawoio  quarter,  and  on  proceeding  thither  silently,  an  interesting 
scene  presented  itself.  The  house  "vvas  crowded  with  Acawoios ; 
and  a  number  of  young  Indians  of  both  sexes,  who  had  been 
taught  at  the  JNIissions,  were  singing,  '  Angels  from  the  realms  of 
glory,'  a  most  intelligent  young  Acawoio,  named  Philip  (Capui), 
giving  out  each  verse  of  the  hymn.  Then  he  took  up  his  Bible  and 
began  to  read  from  the  seventh  chapter  of  Matthew,  interpreting 
each  verse  as  he  went  along,  to  his  countrymen,  in  their  own 
language.  With  much  fervour  he  read  to  them,  '  What  man  is 
there  of  you,  whom  if  his  son  ask  bread,  will  he  give  him  a  stone  1 
Or  if  he  ask  a  fish,  will  he  give  him  a  serpent?  If  ye  then,  being 
evil,  know  how  to  give  good  gifts  unto  your  children,  Iwiv  nwch 
more   shall   vour  Father  which  is  in  lieaven  give  good  things  to 


432  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

On  tliG  morning  of  the  tliird  clay  the  Governor  and 
his  suite  departed. 

During  their  stay  the  excavation  of  the  base  of  the 
mound,  under  the  suioerintendence  of  some  o-entlemen 
of  the  party  of  scientific  tastes,  liad  been  assiduously 
carried  on. 

Though  the  hardness  of  the  consolidated  mass  pre- 
vented rapid  progress,  the  piclv-axe  l^eing  required 
in  the  lower  strata,  the  sand-reef  on  which  the 
tumulus  stands  was  reached.  Tvv'o  singular  teeth, 
resembling  (and  at  first  mistaken  for)  arrow-heads, 
v/ere  found.  Quantities  of  a  substance  resembling 
silvery  scales  were  also  met  with,  which  appeared  to 
be  flakes  of  shells,  partly  decomposed  by  nge,  and 
crushed  hj  the  superincumbent  weight.  There  were 
also  pieces  of  charcoal  found,  and  the  lowest  stratum, 
where  the  sand-reef  was  reached,  was  of  a  dark  colour, 
being  mixed  with  ashes,  as  if  the  spot  had  been  cleared, 
and  the  bush  burnt  when  man  first  settled  there,  and 
ere  the  shells  and  bones  Lad  been  deposited. 

Photographs  of  the  excavated  tumulus,  and  of  the 
various  scenes  which  occurred,  were  taken  by  Mr. 
Bennett,  a  gentleman  of  the  party.  One  represents 
;i  large  group,  consisting  of  Christian  Indians  on  one 

them,  that  ask  Him  ? '  The  affection  of  the  Indians  for  their 
children  is  extreme,  and  the  appeal  t:eenied  to  come  homo 
to  their  liearts  Avith  extraordinary  force.  Earnest  murmnrs  of 
assent  shoAved  how  deep  an  impression  this  passage  had  made 
upon  them,  and  that  it  had  sunk  into  their  minds  witli  all  the 
freshness  and  power  of  a  new  idea,  and  I'liilip  enhu-ged  upon 
the  theme  with  a  sincerity  Avhicli  evidently  had  a  great  effect  upon 
Ills  audience." 


THE  SHELL  MOUNDS  OF  GUIANA.  433 

side,  and  wild  lieathen  on  the  other,  ranged  in  that 
manner  by  the  Governor's  direction.  Neither  pen  nor 
pencil  could  show  the  contrast  in  their  appearance  as 
the  faithful  sun-sketch  has,  or  so  forcibly  exhibit  the 
desraded  state  from  which  our  Missions  had  striven 
to  raise  those  people,  and  what,  by  God's  blessing,  the 
result  with  many  had  been. 

Ere  the  party  left,  Hamburgh,  whom  I  had  sent  to 
search  for  other  shell-mounds,  arrived,  having  com- 
pleted his  third  exploration.  He  had  at  last  been 
completely  successful,  and  triumphantly  exhibited 
specimens  in  proof. 

He  had  found  a  large  shell-mound  near  the  Aka- 
wini,  a  little  beyond  the  spot  where  Cornelius' 
strength  had  failed  him.  It  is  situated,  like  that  at 
Waramuri,  on  the  edge  of  a  swamp  ;  but  is  broader, 
more  flat  in  shape,  and  not  like  that  in  an  elevated 
position. 

He  had  also  found  another  and  much  larger  mound, 
near  Siriki,  a  small  stream  on  the  opposite  or  eastern 
side  of  the  Pomeroon.  This  latter  he  had  roughly 
measured,  and  described  as  being  oblong,  about  250 
feet  in  length  and  90  in  width,  and  of  about  the 
same  height  as  that  at  Waramuri.  This  also,  like  the 
last,  stands  on  the  edge  of,  and  partly  in,  a  swamp, 
adjoining  higher  land.  I  had  five  small  pits  after- 
wards dug  in  this  mound,  and  a  large  quantity  of 
human  bones  were  found,  in  the  same  broken  state  as 
those  at  Waramuri.  Some  were  of  great  size,  and 
must  have  been  the  remains  of  a  man  of  large  stature 
for  an  Indian,  and  of  immense  strength.      His  skull, 

F   F 


434 


THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 


wliich  was  very  thick  and  hard,  was  found  to  have 
been  broken  into  twenty-seven  pieces.^  These  relics 
were  all  embedded  in  shells  as  at  Waramuri. 


On  my  return  to  the  Cabacaburi  Mission,  in 
Pomeroon,  Miss  Eeed,  the  schoolmistress  there,  seeing 
specimens  of  the  shells  which  I  had  with  me,  pointed 
out  a  spot  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  giant  silk-cotton 
tree,  which  overshadows  the  Mission-house,  and 
adorns  the  hill ;  and  told  me  that  similarly  striped 
shells  had  been  found  there  among  the  herbage. 
Search  being  made,  it  proved  to  be  another  shell- 
mound,  which,  resting  against  the  side  of  the  hill, 
and  not  upon  it,  and  being  thickly  covered  with 
cofifee-bushes,  had  escaped  my  attention,  though    for 

1  Those  pieces  were  lying  near  but  detached  from  each  other. 
They  fitted  exactly,  but  when  built  up  a  hole  still  remained  in  the 
right  side  near  the  crown,  where,  it  would  seem,  the  crushing,  fatal 
blow  of  a  pointed  stone  tomahawk  had  been  given. 


THE  SHELL  MOUNDS  OF  GUIANA.  435 

several  years  I  had  lived  almost  over   it.     This  heap 
contained  relics  similar  to  those  foinid  in  the  others. 

It  was  singular  that  we  should,  without  its  being 
known  either  to  the  Indians  or  ourselves,  have 
erected  our  two  Mission  chapels,  each  within  a 
stone's-throw  of  one  of  those  memorials  of  barbarism. 
On  the  very  spots  where  of  late  years  have  been 
oflered  the  morning  and  evening  oblation  of  prayer 
and  praise,  horrid  banquets  may  have  been  held  in 
days  long  past.  God  grant  that  the  light  there 
kindled  may  remain,  and  those  days  of  thick  dark- 
ness never  return  ! 

Soon  after,  I  received  information  respecting  another 
shell-mound  near  the  Moreybo,  a  stream  which,  ad- 
joining a  swamp,  connects  the  river  Waini  with  the 
Barima.  Mr.  Campbell  afterwards  visited  and  ex- 
amined it.  He  described  it  as  about  sixteen  feet  in 
heioht,  with  a  base  of  400  feet  in  circumference. 
It  stands  hard  by  a  small  stream,  called  after  it, 
"  Alaka,"  the  shells. 

Beinof  satisfied,  from  the  uniform  and  concurrent 
testimony  of  the  other  mounds,  as  to  the  savage  habits 
of  the  race  which  had  raised  them,  I  had  requested 
that  no  more  human  remains  should  be  disturbed. 
But  a  piece  of  a  fractured  skull,  which  an  Indian 
unwittingly  threw  in  with  the  specimens  of  oyster  and 
other  shells  sent  to  me,  showed  this  mound  to  be,  in 
that  respect,  similar  to  the  others. 

Another  very  large  mound  was  reported  to  be  near 
a  place  called  Comonoballi,  discovered,  as  in  a  former 
instance,  by  an   Indian  when   hunting.     The  site  of 

F  F  2 


436  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

this  is  somewhat  higher  up  the  river  Waini.  Others 
doubtless  exist  in  various  places. 

Of  these  six  mounds,  that  at  Waramuri  is  nearest 
to  the  sea,  being  only  two  or  three  hours'  paddle  from 
it.  Those  on  or  near  the  Pomeroon  are  more  distant, 
and  the  two  last  mentioned  are  situate  two  or  three 
days'  pull  up  the  Waini. 

The  periwinkle  (the  shells  of  which  form  so  large  a 
portion  of  all  these  masses,  and,  being  washed  bare 
by  the  rain,  led  to  their  discovery)  is  found  near  the 
mouths  of  the  rivers,  and  in  lagoons  and  savannahs 
where  the  water  is  brackish  and  runninsj.  The  Indians 
of  the  present  day,  in  their  continual  expeditions  to 
the  coast  for  sea-fish  or  crabs,  occasionally  collect  these 
and  other  kinds  of  shell- fish  which  fall  in  their  way. 
Some  they  eat  on  the  spot ;  others  are  carried  with 
the  canoe-load  of  crabs  to  their  settlements.  But  the 
quantity  they  procure  is  comj^aratively  small,  and 
they  make  no  such  heaps  as  those  here  mentioned. 
It  would  take  a  long  period  to  accumulate  as  many 
as  are  found  in  one  of  those  masses,  unless  they  were 
more  abundant  than  at  present  they  appear  to  be. 

The  general  contents  and  the  plurality  of  those 
mounds  having  been  thus  ascertained,  it  was  desirable 
in  the  next  place  to  examine  and  compare  the  few 
articles  of  mcm's  loorhnanship  found  in  each.  This 
was  comparatively  easy  with  those  at  the  Missions  ; 
though  distance,  swamps,  and  (in  one  or  two  instances) 
clouds  of  mosquitoes  preventing  all  sleep,  and,  driving 
away  my  workmen,  rendered  it  difficult  thoroughly  to 
search  the  others. 


THE  SHELL  MOUNDS  OF  GVIANA.  437 

The  tumulus  at  Waramuri  is  evidently  an  ancient 
one.  Everything  found  in  it  seemed  to  show  that  the 
people  who  gradually  raised  it  had  not  attained  even 
to  the  low  degree  of  civilization  possessed  by  the 
natives  of  those  regions  at  the  time  of  their  discovery 
by  Europeans.  There  was,  for  instance,  an  entire 
absence  of  fragments  of  pottery,  which  the  cannibal 
Caribs  are  known  to  have  manufactured  in  the 
fifteenth  century,  as  they  probably  did  long  before. 
Into  that  common  refuse  heap  such  fragments,  had 
they  then  existed,  would,  with  the  fish-bones,  shells, 
and  other  articles  dangerous  to  naked  feet,  certainly 
have  been  thrown.  But  though  a  most  careful  search 
was  made,  both  in  digging  to  the  very  base  of  the 
mound  and  while  filling  in  again,  none  were  found;  the 
nearest  approach  being  the  coarse  clayey  slabs,  which 
had  apparently,  as  baking-plates,  been  on  the  fire. 
Neither  was  anything  discovered  which  could  have 
been  used  for  personal  adornment,  save  the  red  earth. ^ 

^  If  the  early  mound-makers  adorned  their  persons  at  all,  it  was 
probably  in  some  such  style  as  the  most  uncivilized  Indians  at  the 
present  day — with  paint,  feathers,  the  teeth  of  animals,  beetles' 
wings,  and  other  perishable  ornaments. 

At  the  time  of  the  discovery  of  Guiana,  in  the  sixteenth  century, 
a  few  articles  of  gold  were  found  among  the  natives,  and  may  have 
been  wrought  by  them,  though  some  have  supposed  that  they  were 
brought  by  traffic  from  the  Far  West. 

In  the  larger  West  Indian  islands,  Cuba,  Hayti,  &c.,  golden 
ornaments  were  also  worn.  The  great  chief  or  king  of  Jamaica, 
at  an  interview  with  Columbus,  was  thus  adorned.  "Around 
his  head  was  a  band  of  stones  of  various  colours,  chiefly  green, 
with  large  white  stones  at  intervals,  connected  in  front  with  a  plate 
of  gold.  Two  othfT  plates  of  gold  were  attarhod  to  his  ears  by 
rings  of  small  green  stones.     To  a  necklace  of  white  stones  was 


438  THE  INDIAN  TEIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

The  stone  axes,  even  those  with  sharpened  edges,  are 
very  rude,  and,  from  the  traces  of  the  habits  of  their 
makers,  we   may    conclude   that   the   latter  were   as 


SPECIMENS   OF   BROKEN   STONE  IMPLEMENTS   FOUND   IN   THE   MOUNDS. 

degraded  as  the  natives  of  Tierra  del  Fuego  are  in  our 
day,  and  probably  more  savage. 

But  while  all  the    contents  of  that  well-searched 
mound  indicated  a  state  of  things  more  or  less  ancient, 

suspended  a  plate  of  guanin  (an  inferior  kind  of  gold),  shaped 
like  a  fleur-de-lys,  and  a  girdle  of  variegated  stones  completed  liis 
regal  decorations.  His  wife  was  similarly  adorned,  having  also 
a  very  small  apron  of  cotton,  and  bands  of  the  same  round  her 
arms  and  legs.  The  eldest  and  handsomest  daughter  of  the  family 
had  a  girdle  of  small  stones,  from  which  was  suspended  a  small 
tablet  of  various  coloured  stones,  embroidered  on  a  network  of 
cotton." 

The  Caribs  and  Arawaks  of  Guiana  were  branches  of  the  two 
Indian  races  in  the  islands,  and  their  ornaments  appear  to  have  been 
similar  in  pattern,  the  materials  being  according  to  their  means. 

Such  also  were  worn  on  the  coast  of  Paria,  which  is  close  to 
Guiana,  at  its  discovery,  with  the  addition  of  pearls  obtained  from 
the  islands  to  the  northward.  The  Indian  belles,  Avho  could  not 
procure  eitlier  pearls  or  variegated  stones,  wore  the  seeds  of  plants 
as  beads  are  worn  now. 


THE  SHELL  MOUNDS  OF  GUIANA.  439 

and  differing  considerably  from  tliat  which  now  exists 
among  our  Indians,  the  contents  of  at  least  one  other 
mound  bring  us  to  a  comparatively  recent  period. 


UNBROKEN  STONE   AXE-HEAD   FOUND   IN   THE   BED   OF   A   STREAM. 

Cabacaburi  mound,  when  first  examined,  seemed 
to  contain  only  such  articles  as  had  been  found  at 
Waramuri.  But,  in  the  subsequent  search  for  Indian 
implements,  I  discovered  proofs  that  some  advance  in 
useful  arts  had  taken  place  ere  the  upper  layers  had 
been  deposited,  and  successive  vegetation  had  covered 
the  surface  with  its  present  thick  coating  of  black 
mould. 

Fragments  of  Indian  pottery  were  found  among  the 
layers  of  shells  about  four  feet  from  the  surface.  They 
were  small  and  few,  but  sufficient  to  show  that  earthen- 
ware had  been  known,  used,  and  broken,  ere  that  heap 
had  attained  its  present  size.  Whether  by  the  same 
race  (slightly  advanced),  which  had  formed  the  other 
mounds,  or  by  another  conquering  and  superseding  it, 
there  is  no  evidence  to  show. 

Wliile  searching  for  those  fragments  we  came  upon 
the  first  personal  ornaments  yet  found, — two  small 
plates  of  silver,  Avith  holes  bored  in  them,  by  which 


440  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

tliey  must  have  been  worn  suspended  from  the  ears. 
One  had  lost  a  corner,  but  they  had  originally  been  cut 
or  broken  to  the  same  size  and  form,  and  were  evidently 


a  pair.  Between  them  lay  a  skull,  which  had  been 
placed  by  itself,  and  was  the  first  we  had  found 
unbroken.  Those  ornaments,  from  their  position, 
seemed  to  have  been  attached  to  that  head  when  de- 
posited there.  A  few  feet  from  the  crown  of  that 
relic  lay  the  remains  of  the  lower  limbs  of  a  female  of 
slight  and  delicate  form.  They  were,  like  the  cranium 
(to  which,  notwithstanding  their  position,  they  seemed 
to  belong),  unhi^oken,  less  discoloured,  and  much 
sounder  than  any  others  found  there.  But  where 
were  the  remains  of  the  body,  arms,  and  feet  ?  Save 
a  portion  of  the  pelvis,  they  could  nowhere  be  found  ; 
though  the  heap  was  carefully  opened  and  searched, 
under  my  own  inspection,  through  a  space  of  several 
feet  around  and  beneath. 

In  doing  this  we  came  at  length  upon  many  others ; 
older  deposits,  which  had  been  cracked  open  as  usual, 
and  were  much  more  decayed  than  the  above,  being  in- 
deed in  a  crumbling  state.  As  we  could  not  proceed 
without  disturbing  them,  I  stopped  t\\Q,  excavation, 
and  had  the  several  pits  we  had  dug  filled  in. 

While  everything  about   the  relics  previously  dis- 


THE  SHELL  MOUNDS  OF  GUIANA.  441 

covered  in  the  several  mounds  liad  indicated  a 
condition  almost  like  that  of  savage  animals,  those 
little  silver  trinkets,  though  rude,  spoke  of  tastes  and 
feelings  approaching  those  of  woman  in  a  state  of 
civilization.  They,  with  the  unbroken  condition  and 
comparative  soundness  of  the  bones  found  with  them, 
bring  us  near  to  our  own  times. ^  Those  remains 
may  have  belonged  to  an  unfortunate  female,  slain 
and  dismembered  in  a  fit  of  furious  rage  and  jealousy, 
deposited  there  after  the  others,  and  not  very  long- 
ago.  This,  however,  is  mere  conjecture.  As  the  con- 
dition of  her  remains  differed  from  those  of  the  others, 
so  probably  did  the  time  and  circumstances  of  her 
fate ;  but  there  is  a  mystery  about  it  which  cannot 
now  be  explained.  Arawaks  have  dwelt  on  that  hill 
for  several  generations,  but  none  could  throw  any 
light  on  the  subject. 

A  few  months  later  I  caused  a  cutting;  to  be  made 
nearly  across  that  mound.  The  contents  of  the  lower 
strata  were  like  those  at  Waramuri,  and  appeared  to 
be  as  ancient.  A  small  stone  chisel  with  sharpened 
edge,  found  with  the  usual  broken  tomahawks,  was 
the  only  novelty.     Among  other  relics  were  the  frag- 

^  This  we  may  consider  j^artly  proved  by  the  material  of  these 
ornaments,  silver,  which  must  have  been  brought  from  a  distance, 
and  was  probably  obtained  from  the  Spaniards  or  Dutch,  though 
rudely  shaped  hy  the  Indians  themselves.  It  is  fully  proved  by 
the  unperished  fragment  of  a  loop,  apparently  of  cotton  cord, 
which  had  attached  one  of  the  plates  to  the  ear, — was,  to  our  great 
surprise,  found  in  it  when  dug  up,— and  at  the  time  of  writing 
this  still  remains  in  the  hole.  The  plates  are  very  thin,  and  their 
greatest  width  is  about  one  inch  and  three-cj^uarters. 


442  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

meuts  of  a  cranium,  widely  scattered,  tlioug]i  all  at 
the  same  level,  about  five  feet  deep. 

About  tliree  feet  from  tlie  surfoce  on  one  side  were 
broken  pieces  of  red  brick,  probably  relics  of  tlie 
Dutch  attempts  at  colonization  in  the  sixteenth  and 
seventeenth  centuries.  (Similar  old  crumbling  frag- 
ments'are  spread  over  a  large  adjoining  portion  of  the 
hill.)  Above  these  were  other  layers  of  shells, 
and  fraoments  of  the  bones  of  animals  and  fishes, 
from  which  it  would  appear  that  the  Indians  had 
resumed  their  occupancy,  and  again  thrown  their 
refuse  there,  after  the  white  men's  settlement  had 
been  broken  up.  But  in  those  upper  layers,  above  the 
bricky  fragments,  no  traces  of  apparent  cannibalism 
were  found. 

In  reviewing  the  general  evidence  of  those  mounds, 
we  find  that  their  sad  and  silent  testimony  tends  to 
confirm  both  the  ancient  traditions  of  the  native  tribes, 
and  the  accounts  of  early  discoverers,  respecting  the 
anthropophagous  habits  of  the  former  inhabitants  of 
the  coast,  as  well  as  of  the  interior  of  Guiana.  Though 
used  by  Defoe  as  materials  for  his  pleasant  fiction  of 
"  Robinson  Crusoe  "  (the  delight  of  our  boyhood, — 
whose  imaginary  island  he  placed  not  far  from  those 
shores),  those  things  were  stern  and  savage  realities, 
terrible  to  their  victims,  in  days  gone  by.  The 
dismal  practice,  always  associated  with  the  land, 
would  seem,  from  the  evidence  of  those  mounds,  to 
have  had  a  long  existence  there.  It  prevailed  in 
times  anterior  to  the  three  centuries  on  which  alone 
the    history    of   (luiana    sheds    a    very    feeble    light, 


THE  SHELL  MOUNDS  OF  GUIANA.  443 

and  continued  until  Europeans  liad  established  their 
ascendency. 

The  retros2:)ect  is  a  gloomy  one.  We  have,  how- 
ever, cause  for  thanlvfulness,  that  with  respect  to  all 
the  tribes  near  the  coast,  those  things  are  now  of  the 
past,  and  that  our  Indians  abhor  them  as  we  do. 

How  great  the  difference  between  the  scenes  which 
must  have  occurred  during  the  construction  of 
Waramuri  tumulus,  and  that  which  took  place  after 
its  excavation !  In  the  evening  of  the  day  following 
the  completion  of  the  latter  work,  the  Indian  con- 
gregation, neatly  dressed,  went  in  procession  with 
their  pastor  and  teacher  from  the  chapel  to  the 
mound ;  and,  ranged  around  and  over  it,  the  various 
tribes  joined  us  in  singing  the  glorious  hymn, — 

"  Jesus  shall  reign  where'er  the  suu 
Doth  his  successive  joui-neys  run,"  &c. 

while  the  Lamb,  the  Dove,  and  other  Christian 
emblems  and  inscriptions,  on  the  banners  borne  by 
the  school-children,  waved  over  the  yawning  cavity 
which  had  disclose^!  to  us  such  relics  of  barbarous 
days. 

"  In  the  region  and  shadow  of  death  light  is  sprung 
up."  .      _ 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

HISTORICAL    SKETCH    OF    THE    INDIAN   NATIONS. 

Difficulty  in  tracing  their  Origin — Timehri  Eocks — Historical 
Traditions — Early  Accounts  of  the  Caribs — Various  Opinions 
of  their  Origin — Conflicts  with  other  Eaces — Supremacy — 
Decline — The  Kapohn  and  cognate  Tribes — The  Macusis,  &c. 
— The  Waraus — The  Arawaks — Accounts  of  early  Discoverers 
— Their  historical  Traditions — Contests  with  the  Caribs — 
Struggles  of  the  Indian  Eaces  with  the  early  Colonists,  &c. 

To  trace  the  early  history  of  the  races  which  were 
found  in  America  at  the  time  of  its  discovery  is  a 
task  of  acknowledged  difficulty.  After  all  the  labour 
bestowed  on  this  subject  by  learned  men,  obscurity 
still  rests  on  the  origin  of  those  nations  which  were 
the  most  civilized,  and  have  left  behind  them  the 
most  durable  monuments. 

And  if  this  be  the  case  with  the  races  possessing 
hieroglyphic  records,  as  the  Toltecs,  Aztecs,  and 
others,  who  raised  the  great  teocallis  of  Oholula  and 
Tenochtitlan,  and  carved  the  elaborate  sculptures 
found  amidst  the  ruins  of  Copan  and  Palenque, — and 
with  those  who  formed  the  roads,  aqueducts,  and 
hanging  bridges,  and  built  the  temples  of  ancient 
Peru, — we  cannot  expect  to  learn  much  of  the  early 
history  of  the  barbarous  tribes  who  inhabited  Guiana. 


HISTORIC  A  L  SKETCB  OF  THE  INDIA  N  NA  TIONS.    445 

From  the  records  preserved  by  tlic  ancient 
Mexicans  of  the  races  which  had  successively  peopled 
the  plateau  of  Anahuac  and  the  surrounding  regions, 
it  would  seem  that  they  had  come  from  the  north, 
following  each  other  as  wave  follows  wave,  each  in 
the  course  of  years  disappearing  in  broken  fragments, 
as  a  fiercer  and  stronger  race  succeeded  it.  Guiana 
may  have  been  reached  at  an  early  period  by 
remnants  or  offshoots  of  some  of  those  broken  nations, 
gradually  retreating  across  the  Southern  continent  in 
the  course  of  ages,  and  yielding  in  succession  fair  and 
fertile  spots,  of  which  they  were  unable  to  keep 
possession.  Or  it  may  have  been  first  peopled  by  a 
race  deriving  its  subsistence  chiefly  from  the  sea,  who 
reached  it  by  creeping  round  the  shores  of  Terra 
Firma,  or  came  from  the  Northern  continent  by 
crossing  from  island  to  island  of  the  West  Indian 
Archipelago.  On  those  points,  however,  all  is 
uncertainty  and  conjecture.  We  know  neither  the 
name  of  the  people  which  first  inhabited  the  country, 
the  quarter  from  whence  they  came,  the  period  of 
their  arrival,  nor  whether  any  of  the  more  barbarous 
existing  Indian  tribes  may,  wholly  or  in  part, 
have  descended  from  them. 

As  the  Indians  found  in  Guiana  had  no  written 
languages,  nor  adequate  means  of  recording  past 
events,  the  little  that  can  be  known  of  them  can  only 
be  gathered  from  the  accounts  of  those  who  first 
discovered  them,  from  their  own  imperfect  tradi- 
tions, from  the  investigation  of  their  languages,  or 
from  the  examination  of  their  sculptured  relics. 


446  THE  INDIAN  TBIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

Few  inliabited  countries  are  more  destitute  of  the 
last  than  Guiana. 

The  masses  of  crumbling  bricks,  found  on  the  banks 
of  our  rivers,  may  enable  the  future  antiquary  to  fix 
the  sites  of  the  early  settlements  of  the  Dutch  colonists. 
But  no  such  durable  traces  of  the  more  ancient  Indian 
habitations  remain.  Their  towns  and  villages  have 
perished,  leaving  no  wreck  behind.  For,  as  the 
Indians  of  our  day  construct  their  dwellings  of  a  few 
timbers  and  a  roof  of  thatch,  so  their  predecessors,  from 
the  earliest  times,  appear  to  have  been  content  with 
similar  habitations.  All  traces  of  these  were  soon  lost 
in  the  ever-springing  vegetation,  as  their  inhabitants, 
from  choice  or  necessity,  shifted  their  abode. 

Amidst  the  dense  forests  of  Guiana  no  traveller  has 
'come  upon  the  carved  ruins  of  temples  and  palaces, 
remains  of  ancient  Indian  greatness,  such  as  are 
found  near  the  western  shore  of  the  Southern 
continent,  or  in  the  regions  of  Central  America  and 
Yucatan.  Nor  do  pyramidal  structures,  as  in  the 
latter  country,  raise  their  summits,  long  defiled  with 
the  blood  of  human  sacrifices,  above  the  tall  trees 
ciround.  No  ruins  of  any  such  edifices  have  been 
discovered,  and  for  memorials  of  past  generations  we 
must  turn  to  the  rocks  in  the  interior. 

Among  these  there  are  several  remarkable  objects, 
with  the  representations  of  which  the  works  of  Sir 
R.  Schomburgk  have  made  us  acquainted. 

In  the  rugged  hilly  region  to  the  westward  of  the 
Essequibo  are  found  masses  of  rock,  some  of  which 
bear  a  rude  resemblance   to  the  figures   of  men   or 


THE  COMUl'l  OR    rAOUlARi   ROUK. 


M(i'NH«ni«t  lith 


ATARAIPU;     OR  DEVIL'S     ROCK, 
(From  SchombursJ-'.S  Views) 


HISTORIC  A  L  SKETCH  OF  THE  INDIA  N  NJ  TIONS.    447 

animals,  ^^'llile  others  are  of  columnar  or  fantastic 
forms/  On  tlie  bank  of  that  river  is  seen  the  huge 
Comuti,  Taquiari,  or  uxUer-jar  rock  ;'  and  near  the 
distant  Guidarn  the  pyramid  of  Ataraipu  raises  its 
sharp  peak  many  hundreds  of  feet  above  the  verdant 
forest  which  climbs  and  clothes  its  base;^  But  in  the 
erection  of  these  the  hand  of  man  had  no  part,  though 
at  a  distance  some  of  them  resemble  his  works. 

■  ^  One  of  those  colmiins  is  an  object  of  -wonder  to  the  Indians 
far  and  near.  They  call  it  Pure-piapa,  "the  felled  tree."  Schom- 
burgk  thus  describes  it : — "  So  complete  was  the  illusion,  that  I 
almost  doubted  my  guides  when  they  told  me  that  it  was  the  work 
of  nature,  and  composed  of  stone.  The  rock  rises  to  a  height  of 
at  least  50  feet;  its  sides  are  partly  covered  with  a  red  lichen,  and 
in  some  places  it  is  more  acted  on  by  the  weather  than  in  others. 
The  delusion  being  increased  by  the  play  of  colours,  the  mind  can 
scarcely  divest  itself  of  the  belief  that  it  is  the  gigantic  trunk  of  a 
tree,  the  head  of  which,  stricken  by  years  and  shivered  by  lightning, 
lies  mouldering  at  its  foot." 

Another  column  standing  near  is  called  Canuye-piapa,  "  the 
Guava-tree  stump." — A  third  mass  is  surmounted  by  a  pillar 
about  fifty  feet  in  height,  the  middle  of  which  bulges  out,  and  is 
likened  by  the  natives  to  the  calabash  fixed  on  the  middle  of  a 
stick,  which  is  used  by  the  sorcerers  in  their  incantations.  They 
call  it  Mara-etshiba. 

-  The  pile  called  by  the  Arawaks  Comuti,  and  by  the  Caribs 
Taquiari,  consists  of  blocks  of  blue  granite.  The  second  is  seated, 
on  the  lower  one  by  only  three  supporting  points ;  the  third  has 
entirely  the  shape  of  a  large  jar,  and  is  surmounted  by  a  fourth, 
rather  flat,  which  the  Indians  have  likened  to  its  cover.  It  does 
not  lose  its  resemblance  to  a  water-jar,  whether  it  be  viewed  from 
the  river  or  from  its  immediate  vicinity,  and  the  mass  is  upwards 
of  160  feet  in  heiglit. 

3  The  base  of  Ataraipu,  or  "  Devil's  Rock,"  is  wooded  for  about 
350  feet  high;  thence  arises  the  mass  of  granite,  devoid  of  all 
vegetation,  for  550  feet  more.  Its  peak  is  900  feet  above  the 
savannah,  and  1,300  above  the  level  of  the  sea. 


448  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

Other  rocks  however  are  found,  chiefly  on  the 
banks  of  rivers,  and  near  cataracts  or  rapids,  which 
bear  on  their  sides  rude  hieroglyphics  graven  by  man's 
device, — relics  of  ancient  days,  when  their  meaning 
was  probably  well  understood  by  passers-by,  though 
none  can  now  explain  it.  These  TimeJiri,  as  they  are 
called,  are  found  on  the  banks  of  the  Corentyn, 
Berbice,  Essequibo,  and  other  rivers,  but  by  what 
race  they  were  carved,  or  at  what  period,  is  not 
certainly  known. 

Similar  inscriptions  on  rocks  have  been  found  far 
beyond  the  boundaries  of  our  province.  They  are 
known  to  extend  beyond  the  Orinoco,  and  as  far  as 
the  Yapura  (a  large  tributary  of  the  Amazon),  over  a 
tract  of  more  than  half  the  width  of  the  continent. 
In  one  part  of  that  wide  territory,  there  is  a  district  of 
more  than  8,000  square  miles  in  extent,  now  wholly 
uninhabited. 

Some  of  those  hieroglyphic  figures  are  doubtless  of 
great  antiquity.  On  the  banks  of  the  Orinoco  Hum- 
boldt found  sculptures  on  the  sides  of  rocks  which  can 
now  only  be  reached  by  very  high  scaftblding,  and  the 
Indians  told  him  that  "  in  the  days  of  the  great  ivaters 
their  fathers  sailed  in  canoes  at  that  height."^ 

^  Others  of  those  carvings  must  be  comparatively  modern. 
Schomburgk  observed  on  hard  granite  blocks  at  the  Ilha  de  Pedra 
on  the  Eio  I^egro,  carved  representations  of  two  vessels  under  sail, 
the  smaller  with  two  masts,  the  larger  not  unlike  a  galleon.  These 
must  have  been  executed  at  a  period  subsequent  to  the  arrival  of 
Europeans.  Other  figures  represent  birds,  animals,  and  men. 
Thirteen  of  the  latter  appear  in  a  row,  as  if  dancing  with  joy  at 
the  sight  of  the  ships,  in  happy  ignorance  of  the  consequences  to 
their  own  race  wliich  would  soon  follow  their  arrival. 


HISTORIC  A  L  SKETCH  OF  THE  INDIA  N  NA  TIONS.    449 

Sir  R.  Scliomburgk  inclinetl  to  tlic  opinion  that  tlic 
Timehri  on  our  rivers  were  the  work  of  the  Carih 
race.  He  had  at  a  former  period  examined  S(~»mc 
sculptured  rocks  near  a  cascade  on  St.  John's — one 
of  the  Virgin  Ishmds,  known  to  liave  been  formerly 
inhabited  by  Caribs — and  found  that  the  carvings 
near  the  rapids  at  AYaraputa  on  the  Esserpiibo  closely 
resemble  them. 

But  Humboldt,  reviewing  that  opinion  of  their 
origin  in  connexion  with  the  vast  extent  of  territory 
through  which  they  arc  found,  says,  "  Notwith- 
standing the  wide  extent  of  the  Carib  invasions,  and 
the  ancient  power  of  that  fine  race,  /  cannot  believe 
that  this  vast  l^elt  of  carved  rocks,  which  intersects 
a  great  portion  of  South  America,  is  actually  to  be 
ascribed  to  the  Carihs.  These  remains  seem  rather 
to  be  traces  of  an  ancient  civilization,  which  may 
have  belonged  to  an  epoch  when  the  tribes  which 
we  now  distinguish  by  various  names  and  races  were 
still  unknown." 

From  the  Timehri  then,  those  singular  and  inte- 
resting carvings,  of  whose  origin  men  of  the  highest 
attainments  speak  so  doubtfully,  we  can  gather  little 
information. 

The  shell-mounds,  with  their  human  remains 
mingled  with  those  of  fishes  and  other  animals,  of 
which  the  discovery  has  been  mentioned  in  the  pre- 
ceding chapter,  may  have  been  formed  l)y  a  race 
more  barljarous  than  that  which  carved  the  hiero- 
glyphics on  the  rocks.  Some  appear  to  be  very 
ancient,    others    of    more    recent    formation.      Their 

G   G 


450  THE  INDIAN  TBIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

construction  must  licive  occupied  a  long  period,  but 
among  the  tribes  who  now  dwell  around,  I  could 
find  no  legend  or  tradition  respecting  them. 

Of  the  Indian  Traditions  in  general,  many,  as 
we  have  seen,  relate  only  to  their  mythology  and 
superstitions.  Others,  descriptive  of  the  fights  and 
massacres  of  bygone  days,  have  a  certain  historical 
value,  but  they  are  chiefly  attached  to  particular 
localities,  and  utterly  fail  in  point  of  chronology ; — 
"  long  time"  being  the  only  expression  of  the 
Indians  to  denote  the  period  of  an  event  which 
may  have  happened  twenty,  fifty,  or  five  hundred 
years  ago. 

Of  the  deeds  to  which  their  historical  traditions 
refer,  many  were  terribly  cruel ;  the  wars  of  the 
Indian  races  (as  distinguished  from  their  predatory 
expeditions)  having  been  almost  always  wars  of 
extermination.  "  Vae  victis"  mioht  have  been  their 
motto.  Some  young  females  might  be  reserved  as 
slaves  and  concubines ;  but  death,  or  a  precarious 
existence  as  a  hunted  fugitive,  was  the  usual  lot  of 
every  male  of  the  vanquished  tribe.  ]\Iany  races 
must  have  thus  flourished  and  been  destroyed  in 
succession ;  the  fugitive  survivors  of  one  naturally 
uniting  with  the  l^roken  remnant  of  another  for 
mutual  support,  and  thus  producing  the  great  number 
of  triljes,  and  their  endless  shades  and  diversities 
of  lanofua2;e. 

Some  of  the  historical  traditions  of  the  coast- 
tribes  mention  races  which  are  no  lonoer  found. 
Among    these   they   particularly   speak    of    a   nation 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH  OF  THE  INDIAN  NA  TIONS.    4  5 1 

called.  J\Ieyt^^o^^',  avIio  are  described  as  having  been 
ferocious  cannibals,  with  whom  their  fathers  had  in 
early  times  to  fight  desperately  for  existence.  Some 
of  those  extinct  tribes  may  have  been  the  barbarous 
primitive  inhabitants  of  the  land,  but  the  traditions 
respecting  them  are  so  dim  and  corrupted  that  no 
reliable  information  can  be  gathered  from  tliem.^ 

The  early  European  discoverers  also  mention  many 
tribes  which  have  since  disappeared,  as  well  as  some 
of  those  which  still  remain.  Fi-om  theii*  accounts  ^ve 
learn  more  of  the  Caribi  nation  than  of  the  others, 
and  there  is,  perhaps,  no  race  equally  uncivilized 
which  has  attracted  more  attention.  This  is  owing, 
not  only  to  their  having  been  the  second  race  dis- 
covered in  the  New  World,  but  also  to  theii-  ferocity 
and  warlike  spirit,  and  their  ravages  over  islands 
and  continent. 

The  mild  and  hospitable  people  discovered  by 
Columbus  in  his  first  voyage  in  1492,  then  inhabited 
the  Lucayos  or  Bahamas,  together  Avith  the  extensive 
islands  of  Cuba,  tiayti,  Jamaica,  and  Boriquen  or 
Porto  Rico.  Their  race  seems  to  have  possessed 
originally  the  wdiolc  of  the  islands,  from  Florida  to 
the  coast  of  Paria  on  the  Southern  continent.  Beins: 
mild  and  peaceful,  they  engaged  in  war  with  re- 
luctance, and  could  scarcely  maintain  possession  of 
the   islands  where    they   were    most    numerous    and 

^  The  Arawak  traditions,  as  related  to  me  respecting  tlic  terrible 
Meyanow  (whom  they  carefully  distinguish  from  the  Caribs),  speak 
with  horror  of  their  anthropophagous  habits.  But  they  add  other 
circumstances  vrhich  are  quite  incredible. 

G    G    2 


452  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

powerful.  In  Porto  Eico  and  in  Hayti  they  were 
exposed  to  continual  attacks  from  the  Caribs,  and 
a  part  of  the  latter  island  was  under  the  power  of 
Caonabo,  a  Caribi  chief,  when  discovered  by  the 
Spaniards. 

In  his  second  voyage  (1493),  Columbus  discovered 
the  Caribi  Islands,  so  called  from  their  inhabitants. 
This  beautiful  group  extends  almost  in  a  semicircle 
from  the  eastern  end  of  Porto  Eico  to  the  coast  of 
South  America.  ■       v 

The  appearance  and  habits  of  the  Caribs  then 
discovered  corresponded  with  those  of  that  tribe 
afterwards  found  in  Guiana.  While  cruising  among 
the  islands,  their*  discoverer  had  many  proofs  of  the 
spirit  of  this  people.  He  found  that  they  went  on 
predatory  expeditions  in  their  canoes  to  the  distance 
of  150  leagues.  Their  arms  were  clubs,'^witli  bows 
and  arrows,  the  latter  pointed  with  the  bones  of  fishes 
and  poisoned.  They  attacked  the  other  islands  and 
the  main  land,  carried  off  the  women  as  slaves  or 
companions,  and  made  prisoners  of  the  men  to  be 
killed  and  eaten.  With  all  their  [^ferocity  they  paid 
considerable  attention  to  agriculture,  and  brought 
home  with  them  valuable  plants  and  seeds  from  the 
countries  which  they  overran. 

The  Spaniards  had  what  they  considered  full  evi- 
dence of  the  cannibalism  of  this  savage  race.  They 
found  at  Turuqueira,  or  Guadaloupe,  human  limbs 
suspended  to  the  beams  of  the  houses,  and  the  head 
of  a  young  man  recently  killed,  some  parts  of  whose 
body  \\'ere  roasting  before  the  fire,  and  others  boilino- 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH  OF  THE  INDIA N  NA  TIONS.    453 

witli  the  flcsli  of  geese  and  parrots/  On  tliat  island 
they  found  some  captive  women,  and  learned  from 
tliem  that  the  Carib  chief,  with  ten  canoes  and  three 
hundred  warriors,  was  then  absent  on  an  expedition  in 
quest  of  prisoners  and  booty.  On  such  occasions  the 
wives  of  the  Caribs,  who  were  expert  archers,  and 
almost  equalled  their  husbands  in  strength  and 
courage,  remained  to  defend  their  shores. 

The  discoverers  soon  after  had  proof  of  the  courage 
and  ferocity  of  the  Caribs  at  the  island  of  Ayay,  now 
Santa  Cruz.  A  canoe  came  round  the  island  and 
apj)roached  the  ships.  The  Caribs  iu  it  were  so 
amazed  at  beholding  them,  that  they  allowed  their 
retreat  to  be  cut  off  by  a  Spanish  bark  with  twenty- 
five  men.  When  they  at  length  perceived  this,  they 
attacked  them  with  undaunted  courage,  discharging 
their  arrows  with  amazing  force  and  rapidity.  The 
women  in  the  canoe,  which  contained  the  cpieen  of 
the  island,  fought  as  well  as  the  men,  and  one  of 
them  sent  an  arrow  com2")letely  through  a  Spanish 
buckler.  Their  canoe  being  run  down,  some  got  upon 
sunken  rocks,  and  others  used  their  Ijows  while 
swimming  in  the  sea,  nor  was  it  without  great  difh- 
culty  that  they  could  be  overpowered  and  taken. 

The  hair  of  those  savage  islanders  was  coarse  and 
long ;  their  eyes  were  encircled  with  paint,  so  as  to 
give  them  a  hideous  expression,  and  bands  of  cotton 
were  bound  tightly  round  their  limbs,  causing  them 
to  swell,  where  unconfined,  to  a  disproportionate  size. 
This  description  Avould  apply  almost  as  well  to  the 
^  Irving's  Columlju?,  book  vi.  cliap.  ii. 


454  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

C-iribs  inliabiting  Guiana  : — whose  ferocity  has  been 
equally  noted ;  who  still  paint  their  faces  and  bodies  ; 
and  whose  women  continue  to  wear  the  "  sapuru/' 
or  bands  of  cotton  tightly  fixed  on  their  limits. 

Those  enterprising  and  barbarous  islanders  had 
a  tradition  that  their  fathers  came  originally  from 
the  river  Orinoco/  and  having  conquered  and 
exterminated  the  former  inhabitants  of  those 
islands,  had  taken  possession  of  their  lands  and 
their  women." 

This,  being  the  idea  of  the  Caribs  themselves,^  may 
be  considered  as  entitled  to  a  certain  deo-ree  of 
respect.  It  is  supported  also  by  the  great  affinity 
of  their  lanojuas^e  to  the  dialects  of  various  other  tribes 
in  Guiana.'* 

Some  learned  men,  however,  thought  at  one  period 
that  they  came  from  the  vicinity  of  Darien.  This 
opinion  seems  to  have  arisen  chiefly  from  the  simi- 
larity of  their  name  to  Caribana,  a  cape  so  called  by 
the  natives  of  that  region. 

A  third  opinion  is  that  ih.Qy  came  from  the  Northern 
continent.  It  is  said  that  they  can  ha  traced  to  the 
ancient  province  of  Confachiqui  in  the  north  of  Florida, 
and  that  their  name   "  Caribes/'  signifying    "  valiant 

^  Humboldt's  Narrative,  book  xxvi. 

"  From  the  iiiiion  of  tlie  Caribs  witli  the  womeu  of  the  con- 
quered islanders  arose  a  distinction  of  dialect  between  the  two 
sexes  in  the  Caribi  Islands.  The  language  of  the  men  had  nothing 
in  common  with  that  spoken  in  the  larger  islands.  The  dialect  of 
the  women  considerably  resembled  it. — Lahat,  129. 

-'  Itiynal's  History  of  the  Indies,  book  x. 

4  See  Note  L,  p.  474.  . 


RI8T0BICAL  ;SKET(.IH  OF  THE  INDIA  N  NA  TloyS.    4  5  j 

straugers,"  was  given  tlieni  by  tlie  .iVpalarlntes ; 
with  wlioui  tliey  had  long  waged  war,  and  who  at 
length  yielded  to  them  a  fertile  district  and  received 
them  as  confederates.  A  dispute,  however,  having 
arisen  with  their  neighbours  respecting  their  religious 
rites,  the  Caribs  found  it  necessary  to  quit  Florida, 
and  fell  in  succession  upon  the  smaller  islands  in  the 
West  Indian  seas,  avoiding  the  larger,  where  the 
inhabitants,  though  unwarlike,  were  powerful  by  their 
numbers. 

A  late  eminent  writer,  who  favours  this  account  of 
their  origin,  speaks  of  them  as  passing  "  from  island 
to  island  of  that  vast  and  verdant  chain  which  linlcs, 
as  it  were,  the  end  of  Florida  to  the  coast  of  Paria, 
on  the  Southern  continent.  The  archipelago  extending 
from  Porto  Eico  to  Tobago  was  their  stronghold,  and 
the  island  of  Guadaloupe  in  a  manner  their  citadel. 
Hence  they  made  their  expeditions,  and  spread  the 
terror  of  their  name  throuo^h  all  the  surround  in  o- 
countries.  Swarms  of  them  landed  upon  the  Southern 
continent,  and  overran  some  parts  of  Terra  Fiiina. 
Traces  of  them  have  been  discovered  in  the  interior 
of  that  vast  country  through  which  flov/s  the  Orinoco. 
The  Dutch  found  colonies  of  them  on  the  banks  of  the 
Cottica,  which  empties  into  the  Surinam,  along  the 
Essequibo,  the  Marowiui,  and  other  rivers  of  Guiana, 
and  in  the  country  watered  by  the  windings  of  the 
Cayenne  ;  and  it  would  appear  that  they  extended 
their  wanderinos  to  the  shores  of  the  Southern  ocean, 
where,  among  the  aborigines  of  Brazil,  were  some 
who  called  themselves  Caribs,  distinguished  from  the 


456  TEE  INDIAN  TEIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

siuToundiiig    Indians    by   tlieir     superior    hardihood, 
subtlety,  and  enterprize."-^ 

Tlie  island  Caribs,  the  cannibal  Vikings  of  the 
West,  were  found,  by  the  companions  and  successors 
of  Columbus,  spreading  terror  and  desolation  over 
very  distant  shores. 

In  1499  the  ship  of  Nino  and  Guerra,  after  sailing 
along  the  coast  of  Guiana,  was  attacked  by  eighteen 
canoes  of  Caribs  near  the  Boca  del  Drago.  The 
Spaniards  dispersed  them  by  a  discharge  of  artillery, 
and  captured  a  canoe  with  one  of  the  warriors  who  had 
manned  it.  In  the  bottom  of  the  canoe  lay  an  Indian 
of  another  nation,  a  prisoner,  bound  hand  and  foot, 
who  informed  the  Spaniards  by  signs  that  those  Caribs 
had  been  on  a  marauding  expedition  along  the  neigh- 
bouring coasts,  shutting  themselves  up  by  night  in  a 
stockade,  which  they  carried  with  them,  and  issuing 
forth  by  day  to  plunder  and  make  captives.  He  had 
been  one  of  seven  prisoners, — his  companions  had  been 
devoured  before  his  eyes, — and  he  had  himself  been 
awaiting  the  same  fate.  The  Spaniards,  indignant  at 
the  recital,  gave  up  the  Carib  to  be  slain  by  his  late 
captive,  who  mauled  and  beat  him  to  death  in  the 
most  savage  manner. 

In  the  same  year  the  famous  Alonzo  de  Ojeda  found 
the  inhabitants  of  Cumana  and  Macarapaua,  on  the 

^  Irviag's  Columbus,  book  vi.  chap.  iii. 

Those  "who  believe  the  Caribs  to  liave  come  origiuallj'  from  the 
iS^orthern  continent,  consider  the  emigration  to  have  taken  place 
about  the  end  of  the  eleventli  century  of  the  Christian  era. — 
Humboldt's  Narrative,  chap.  xxvi. 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH  OF  THE  INDIAN  NATIONS.   457 

nortliern  coast  of  Term  Firma,  suffering  greatly  from 
their  ravages  ;  and  at  tlieii-  request,  attacked  one  of 
tlie  C'aribi  Islands  from  ^\•llicll  tlieir  cannibal  invaders 
came.  The  latter,  thus  assailed  in  their  own  strong- 
hold, fought  for  two  successive  days  with  great  fury, 
but  could  do  very  little  against  the  superior  weapons, 
armour,  artillery,  and  discipline  of  the  Spaniards,  who 
slew  many  of  them  in  battle,  plundered  and  burnt 
theii'  dwellings,  and  took  many  captives.^ 

This  was  a  foretaste  of  the  fate  AAhieh  the  Caribs 
were  to  experience  from  the  Europeans  who  afterwards 
came  to  occupy  those  fair  isles  of  the  AVest. 

To  reduce  their  power  and  numbers  Columbus  pro- 
posed that  they  should  be  captured  and  sent  to  Spain 
as  slaves,  in  exchange  for  live-stock  to  be  furnished  to 
the  colonies  he  had  established.  The  admiral  thus 
hoped  to  make  their  bodies  profitable  and  useful,  and 
also  to  save  their  souls,  according  to  the  tenet  which 
allowed  the  conversion  of  infidels  by  force  as  well  as 
persuasion.  But  Queen  Isabella  (who,  yielding  to  her 
spiritual  guides,  had  allowed  myriads  of  her  subjects 
to  perish  Ijy  the  Inquisition)  found  a  difierence  of 
opinion  among  her  advisers  on  the  subject  of  Indian 
slavery ;  and,  following  the  dictates  of  her  own 
conscience,  refused  to  sanction  it  until  -  her  death 
in  1504. 

In  that  year,  however,  they  were  declared  to  be 
slaves  by  a  royal  decree ;  and,  by  a  subsequent 
order    of   Kinci'    Ferdinand,    were    branded    on    the 

1  Irving's  Companions  of  Columbus. 
-  Irving's  Columbus,  book  vi. 


458  THE  INDIAN  THIBET  OF  GUIANA. 

leoj  when  canoiit  to  distino'uisli  tlicm  from  other 
Indians.^ 

lu  the  sanguinary  struggles  which  then  ensued,  the 
Caribs  fought  with  the  fury  of  despair.  When  attacked 
in  their  islands  few  of  the  men  could  be  taken  alive, 
and  the  women  defended  themselves  Avith  equal  des- 
peration after  their  husbands  v^ere  slain.  From  those 
islands  they  also  sallied,  and  struck  terror  into  the 
Spanish  colonists  by  sudden  descents,  in  which  they 
carried  off  many  of  them. 

A  small  but  well-appointed  squadron,  under  a 
gallant  old  warrior,  Juan  Ponce  du  Leon,  was  sent  by 
Ferdinand  to  scour  the  islands,  and  free  the  seas  from 
their  presence.  But  at  Cxuadaloupe,  where  this  force 
first  landed,  the  Caribs  rushed  from  an  ambuscade, 
captured  all  the  Spanish  women,  who  were  washing 
the  clothes  of  the  crews,  and  slew  so  many  of  the  men 
as  to  compel  the  abandonment  of  the  expedition. - 

For  a  long  period  their  race  by  its  wild  bravery 
retained  possession  of  the  islands,  but  in  the  struggle 
their  numbers  gradually  diminished,  and  they  were  at 
length  exterminated  by  colonists  of  various  nations. 
As  they  had  destroyed  or  driven  out  the  original 
inhabitants,  so  they  were  themselves  now  destroyed  or 
expelled ;  their  weapons  being  unecpial  to  those  of 
their  invaders.  They  found  that  the  bow  and  arrow 
AATre  no  match  for  the  musket,  nor  the  war-club  for 
the  sword.  At  St.  C'hristopher's,  in  1625,  two  thousand 
Caribs    perished    in    battle,    wliilst     their    European 

^  Appendix  to  Irviug's  CulumLuf,  Xo.  II. 
2  Compaiiiuns  of  Columbus. 


IIISTOBICA L  SKETCH  OF  TIJE  INDIAN  NA  TIONS.    4 5 ») 

iiivacleTS,  Frcncli  and  English  united,  lost  one  liundivd 
nicn.^  In  tlic  otlier  islands  tlieir  losses  were  equally 
great. 

Those  ealamities  would  naturally  cause  a  migration, 
when  they  found  it  useless  to  fight  more.  Some  of  the 
islands,  as  Martinieo,  were  suddenly  abandoned  by 
them,  after  a  fierce  but  unavailino-  struo-ole/  In 
others,  as  Grenada,  they  remained  unmolested  a  few 
years  longer.  In  IG.jO  the  French  from  IMartinico 
visited  them  there,  and  were  kindly  received.  Pre- 
tending to  have  purchased  the  island  for  a  few  knives, 
beads,  &c.,  which  the  natives  had  received  from  them 
as  presents,  they  built  a  fort,  and  then  commenced 
the  work  of  extirpation.  One  of  the  precipices  of  that 
island  was  named  "  La  Morne  de  Sauteurs,"  because 
forty  of  the  Cariljs,  seeing  death  inevitable,  leapt 
from  it  into  the  sea,  and  perished  there.^  Dominica 
and  St.  Vincent  were  the  last  islands  retained  by 
them. 

Those  of  the  CV^ribs  who  chose  to  forsake  the  islands 
entirely  would  naturally  take  refuge  with  their 
brethren  in  Guiana,  and  by  their  valour  secure  to 
themselves  such  portions  of  that  country  as  they  might 

^  Martin's  West  Indies,  p.  3G8. 

-  Abljc  Eaynal,  "book  xiii. 

^  Fatlier  du  Tertre,  having  described  how  one  of  the  caj)tive 
survivors,  a  young  Carib  girl,  was  shot  by  one  ofticer  of  the  party, 
because  two  others  were  disputing  for  the  possession  of  her,  says 
of  that  expedition,  what  alas,  has  been  true  of  many  such  by 
various  civilized  nations  :  "  Our  people  having  lost  but  one  man, 
proceeded  to  set  fire  to  the  cottages,  and  root  up  the  provisions 
of  the  savages,  &c.  &.C.,  and  rdurntd  in  hnjlt  ^2^irit6." — ]M auxin's 
Bi-ituli  Colonics,  p.  tO. 


460  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUI  AN  A. 

tliink  fit  to  occupy ;  as  few  tribes  would  be  able,  or 
incleecl  dare,  to  oppose  tlicm. 

At  St.  Vincent  many  still  remained.  Tbey  com- 
mitted great  devastations  from  time  to  time  on  the 
plantations,  especially  in  a  war  stirred  up  by  the 
French  revolutionists,  which  commenced  in  1795, 
mid  lasted  two  years,  laying  waste  a  great  part  of 
the  island.  The  British  Government  removed  the 
Carib  insurgents,  when  conquered,  to  the  island  of 
Ruatan,  in  the  bay  of  Honduras.^  Their  descendants 
migrated  to  the  neighbouring  coast  and  may  be  found 
settled  there.^ 

AVhile  in  the  islands  called  by  their  name  the 
fortunes   of  the    Carib   race   were  thus  declining,  on 

iSToTE  A.— Descendants  of  the  Caribs  are  still  found  at  St. 
A'^incent.  Through  the  kind  instrumentality  of  the  Bishops  of 
Barbados  and  Guiana,  a  small  vocabulary  of  their  language  was 
collected  for  me  by  the  Eev.  T.  A.  Browne,  late  rural  dean  of  that 
island,  a  service  I  gratefully  acknowledge. 

It  consisted  of  forty-nine  words.  Ten  of  them,  including 
"  AYayeu,"  the  sun,  and  their  words  for  water,  tree,  hhxl,  fish,  fire, 
&c.,  agree  with  those  spoken  by  our  Caribs  in  Guiana.  Ten  others, 
as  "Barawa,"  the  sea,  "Heinyarro,"  ivoman,  and  their  words  for  moon, 
stars,  &c.,  are  Arawak,  with  slight  variations  ;  and  are  evidently  from 
the  women's  language.  Other  eight,  as  "Aragaboos,"  ffun,  are  of 
Spanish  or  European  origin,  and  are  mostly  the  same  as  our  Indians 
use.  Of  the  remaining  twenty-one,  two  or  three  have  a  great  re- 
semblance to  words  used  by  our  Indians  ;  the  others  are  unknown 
to  me.  These  latter  may  have  been  derived  in  part  from  the 
African  element  in  the  black  Caribs,  who  were  found  with  the 
pure  race  when  the  island  was  settled  by  Europeans,  and  who 
are  supposed  to  have  siirung  from  the  union  of  negroes  (escaped 
from  the  wreck  of  a  slave-ship,  or  from  neighbouring  islands)  with 
the  native  Indian  race. 

^  Stephen's  Central  America. 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH  OF  THE  INDIAN  NATIONS.  4G1 

the  Soiitlieru  continent  they  were  extending  their 
power. 

With  the  Arawaks  inhabiting  the  coast  of  Guiana, 
they  had  been  in  a  state  of  hostility  from  time 
immemoriaL  So  many  of  that  tribe  had  from  time 
to  time  become  their  victims,  and  so  greatly  had 
they  sufifered  from  their  predatory  attacks,  that  the 
survivors  became  warlike  of  necessity,  and  resolutely 
opposed  their  aggressions  by  land  and  water.  When 
overmatched  they  would  retire  to  the  swampy  lands 
usually  inhabited  by  the  Waraus,  and  there  main- 
tain the  struggle,  never  losing  their  independence, 
though  sufferino-  much  from  time  to  time. 

Meanwhile,  the  Caribs  had  become  the  dominant 
race  on  the  banks  of  the  lower  Orinoco,  the  Essequibo, 
and  the  other  large  rivers  to  the  eastward ;  extending 
their  incursions  to  the  provinces  watered  by  the 
Amazon.  Wherever  they  chose  to  settle,  the  weaker 
tribes  were  cbiven  to  the  forest  or  the  mountain. 

The  settlement  of  Europeans  in  various  parts  of 
the  continent  was  regarded  by  the  Caribs  with 
jealous  animosity,  and  many  attempts  made  to 
expel  the  intruders.  Some  towns,  as  Cariaco, 
were  repeatedly  sacked  by  them.  In  1578-80, 
their  cannibal  hordes  assembled  in  great  numbers, 
ascended  the  Guarico  (a  northern  tributary  of 
the  Orinoco),  and  crossed  the  llanos  (or  plains)  to 
destroy  the  settlements  of  the  Spaniards  and  the 
city  of  Valencia,  then  recently  founded.  Though 
finally  repulsed  and  driven  back  to  their  forests, 
they  still  continued  ^•ery  powerful,  holding  dominion 


4G2  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

over  all  the  countries  tliroiigli  wliicli  El  Dorado 
was  then  being  vainly  sought,  and  cutting  off 
those  who  from  time  to  time  engaged  in  that 
adventure. 

The  capture  of  the  Spanish  settlements  at  Trinidad, 
Caracas,  and  other  places,  and  the  great  damage 
inflicted  on  that  nation  by  Sir  Walter  Ealeigh  and 
his  lieutenants  at  the  close  of  the  sixteenth  century, 
seem  to  have  inclined  the  Caribs  and  other  tribes 
to  give  the  English  a  more  favourable  reception. 
Looking  on  them  in  some  measure  as  friends, 
because  they  had  the  same  foes,  they  allowed  them 
to  explore  the  Caroni,  Corentyn,  and  other  large 
rivers  to  a  considerable  distance ;  and  seem  to  have 
entered  into  an  alliance  with,  them  ao-ainst  the 
Spaniard  as  a  common  enemy.  Of  that  alliance 
our  Caribs  on  the  Essccjuibo  long  cherished  the 
memory,  and  regarded  as  a  sacred  relic  the  English 
colours  which  Kaleigh,  at  parting,  left  Vv^ith  them,^ 
that  they  might  recognise  the  vessels  of  his  nation. 

They  were  not,  however,  inclined  to  allow  the 
English,  or  any  other  European  nation,  to  settle 
among  them,  and  we  find  them  in  the  next  century 
resolutely  opposing  all  their  efforts  to  found  colonies 
on  the  Atlantic  shore. 

The  attempt  of  the  Portuguese  to  settle  at  the 
junction  of  the  Essequibo  and  its  large  tributaries 
— of  which  the  only  relic  seems  to  have  Ijeen  the 
rudely-carved   arms    of  their   nation,    found   by   the 

^  Bancroft,  wlio  wrote  in  1769,  speaks  of  tliat  flag  as  preserved 
by  them. 


iriSTOEICAL  iSKETCH  OF  THE  IXDIAX  XATIOX^.  403 

Duteii  over  tlio  gatevray  of  a  ruined  fort  on  the 
island  of  Ivyk-over-al — was  probably  frustrated  Ijy 
tlie  opposition  of  the  Caribs,  Avho  were  then  very 
numerous  ajid  powerful  on   those  rivers. 

The  English,  under  Captain  Marshall,  attempting 
about  the  year  1G2G  to  settle,  first  on  the  Como- 
wini,  and  then  on  the  I'reat  Coma  or  Surinam,  were 
suecessively  driven  by  the  Caribs  from  both  plaees. 
The  Freneh  made  a  similar  attempt,  and  were  also 
driven  off.  xlnother  attempt  of  the  English  about 
1652  Vv'as,  however,  successful.  A  colony  was 
founded  at  Paramaribo,  v.'hich  some  years  after  was 
given  over  by  treaty  to  the  Dutch,  who  had  already, 
after  much  difficulty,  established  themselves  on  the 
Essecjuibo  and  Berbice. 

The  French  had  meanwhile  settled  at  Cayenne. 
Their  Governor,  Bretigny,  was  cruel  both  to  colonists 
and  natives,  and  the  Caribs  laid  a  plot  for  his 
destruction.  One  of  their  women  revealed  it  to  the 
Governor,  who  seized  some  of  the  conspirators.  The 
latter  escaped,  threw  themselves  into  the  river,  and 
swam  to  the  main  land.  Bretigny,  following  in  a 
canoe  Vvith  an  armed  force,  was  overtake  q  by  night, 
and  in  the  morning  saw  the  thatched  hut  in  which 
he  had  taken  shelter  surrounded  by  a  multitude  of 
savages  equipped  for  battle.  Without  attempting 
resistance  he  wi'aj)ped  himself  in  his  cloak,  and  fell, 
with  his  men,  under  the  arrows  and  clubs  of  the 
exasperated  natives. 

The  Caribs  then  attacked  and  destroyed  the  French 
settlements,  and  massacred  the  inhabitants. 


464  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

Tlie  attempt  to  re-establisli  the  colony  in  1652 
failed  completely.  De  Royville,  the  Governor,  having 
been  assassinated  on  the  voyage  out,  insubordination, 
bloodshed,  and  anarchy  prevailed  ;  a  grievous  famine 
ensued,  and  the  C^aril^s  again  attacked  the  colonists. 
The  miserable  survivors  fled  in  an  open  boat  and 
two  canoes,  and  finally  reached  one  of  the  Leeward 
Islands. 

The  Dutch  then  occupied  and  cultivated  the 
vacant  lands,  but  the  French  in  1664  retook  them, 
and,  after  many  vicissitudes,  remained  masters  of 
Cayenne. 

While  Europeans  were  thus  occupying  the  eastern 
rivers  in  succession,  the  Caribs  had  much  of  their 
attention  and  streno;th  eno;ao:ed  in  another  direction 
by  their  continual  conflicts  with  the  distant  tribes  of 
the  interior. 

Their  feuds  on  the  Orinoco  were  incessant,  and 
carried  on  with  the  greatest  ferocity.  Sometimes 
they  ascended  that  great  river  with  numerous  canoes ; 
at  other  times  they  came  upon  their  enemies  by 
crossing  the  high  lands,  and  descending  one  or  other 
of  its   many  tributary  streams. 

A  glance  at  a  map  will  show  the  reader  that  the 
upper  course  of  the  Orinoco  is  almost  semicircular, 
and  that  consequently  the  heads  of  the  tributaries 
on  its  rio;lit  bank  are  at  no  oycat  distance  from  each 
other.  Availing  themselves  of  this,  the  C*aribs  of 
the  Caroni,  being  strengthened  for  great  expeditions 
by  those  of  the  Esscquibo  and  other  parts,  would 
cross  by  shoit  portages  from  one  stream  to  another, 


IIISTOBICAL  SKETCH  OF  TUB  INDIAN  NATIONS.  4G5 

and  descending  the  Caura,  the  Ventuari,  or  some 
intermediate  river,  precipitate  themselves  on  the 
tribes  they  desired  to  attack,  some  of  which  were 
more  wild  and  savage  than  themselves.  To  surprise 
their  foes,  they  would  bind  canoes  or  rafts  together, 
and  cover  them  with  branches  of  trees  or  grass,  to 
resemble  those  masses  which  are  always  floating 
on  the  water.  Crouching  under  these,  they  would 
silently  drift  near,  and  take  them  at  a  disadvantage. 
Nor  were  their  foes  inferior  either  in  craft  or 
ferocity. 

Attacks  and  reprisals  would  in  this  way  follow 
each  other  for  a  long  time,  until  at  length  each 
side,  thoroughly  exasperated,  would  assemble  all  its 
warriors  for  a  decisive  action.  Those  battles,  so  fatal 
to  one  or  other  of  the  contending  tribes,  usually  com- 
menced with  flights  of  arrows  (many  of  them  poisoned) 
at  long  range,  and  ended  in  a  deadly  conflict  with 
clubs  and  other  hand-weapons  till  one  party  gave  way. 
The  result  Avas  a  great  slaughter,  generally  followed 
by  a  merciless  pursuit,  and  the  extermination,  if  pos- 
sible, of  the  defeated  tribe. 

Of  ail  the  Indian  nations,  the  Cabres  (or  Caberres), 
who,  in  common  with  many  tribes  in  that  part  of 
Guiana  and  of  Brazil,  were  cannibals,  most  fiercely 
opposed  the  Caribs.  For  a  long  period  the  banks  of 
the  Orinoco  had  been  ensanguined  by  the  obstinate 
struggle  between  them.  At  length,  in  the  early  part 
of  the  eighteenth  century,  the  Cabres,  having  placed 
all  their  warriors  under  one  valiant  chief  named 
Tej),  gave   their   enemies   a   terrible   overthrow  near 

H   H 


466  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

tlie    month   of   the    Caiira.      Grccat   numbers  of    the 
Caribs  perished  in  the  precipitate  flight  that  ensued. 

The  Cabres  devoured  their  prisoners,  and  by  a 
refinement  of  cruelty  spared  the  life  of  one,  whom 
they  compelled  to  climb  a  tree  that  he  might  witness 
the  harrowing  spectacle  of  their  savage  banquet,  and 
then  carry  tidings  to  his  vanquished  countrymen. 
The  result,  however,  was  not  such  as  the  victors  had 
anticipated,  and  their  triumph  was  of  short  duration. 
For  the  Caribs,  calling  their  warriors  together  for 
vengeance  from  the  most  remote  parts,  and  putting 
forth  all  their  strength,  attacked  them  with  such 
fury  that  the  power  of  the  Cabres  was  utterly  l3roken, 
and  their  nation  almost  exterminated,  only  a  feeble 
remnant  beino;  left  on  the  banks  of  the  Cuchivero.^ 

After  this  event  the  Caribs  were  masters  of  the 
greater  part  of  the  interior  of  Guiana.  Their  power 
extended  from  the  settlements  of  the  w^hite  men  to 
the  two  great  cataracts  of  the  Orinoco,  Atures,  and 
Maypures.  At  each  of  these  that  great  river  pre- 
sents a  foaming  surface  some  miles  in  length,  and 
"  intersected  by  numerous  iron-black  masses  of  rock 
projecting  like  battlemented  ruins  from  the  waters;" 
every  islet  and  rock  being  adorned  with  luxuriant 
forest  trees  and  palms,  wdiose  summits  pierce  through 
clouds  of  vapoury  spray. 

^  Ilumbokit,  wlio  has  noticed  the  fate  of  the  Cahres  as  above, 
says  that  so  great  was  the  detestation  in  which  the  Caribs  held 
them,  that  he  has  seen  a  little  boy  foam  Avith  rage  at  being  called 
"  a  Cabrc,"  The  site  of  the  chief  town  or  village  of  the  latter  race 
is  still  called  Cabritu. 


HISTOBICAL  SKETCH  OF  THE  INDIAN  NATIONS.  467 

There  was  a  legend  among  the  Guareke  or  Guahibo 
Indians,  who  dwelt  near  those  falls,  "  that  the  brave 
Atiires,  when  closely  pursued  by  the  cannibal  Caribs, 
took  refuge  among  the  rocks  of  the  cataracts  which 
bear  their  name,  where  that  oppressed  race  perished, 
together  with  its  language."  In  an  immense  vault, 
formed  by  a  far-projecting  and  overhanging  cliff, 
Humboldt  and  Bonpland  saw  the  skeletons  of  the 
extinct  tribe,  six  hundred  in  number,  placed  in 
baskets  formed  of  the  stalks  of  palm  leaves.  There 
were  also  large  urns  of  half-baked  clay,  which  seemed 
to  contain  the  bones  of  whole  families.  They  were 
of  elegant  oval  form  and  greenish  colour,  with 
handles  shaped  like  serpents  and  crocodiles,  and 
rims  ornamented  with  scrolls  and  labyrinthine 
figures.  The  race  which  manufactured  these  may 
have  been  in  many  points  superior  to  its  destroyers.^ 

Above  the  great  cataract  the  supremacy  of  the 
Caribs  was  disputed  by  the  Guaypunaves,  who  came 
northward  from  the  Inirida,  were  of  the  same  race 
as  the  Cabres,  and,  like  them,  cannibals."     AVith  these 

^  A  few  individuals  of  this  ill-fated  tribe  were  still  surviving  in 
1767.  There  was  an  old  parrot  still  living  in  1800  which  could 
not  be  understood,  "because,"  as  the  natives  said,  "it  spoke  the 
language  of  the  Atures." — Humboldt's  Personal  Narrative,  chap, 
xxiv.,  and  Cataracts  of  the  Orinoco. 

2  In  the  days  of  Shakespeare  and  Ealeigh,  two  kinds  of  fearful 
beings  were  said  to  inhabit  the  wilds  of  Guiana — 

"The  anthi'opophagi,  and  men  whose  heads 
Do  grow  beneath  their  shoulders." 

It  would  have  been  well  had  the  former  been  as  fabulous  as  the 
latter.    But  it  is  too  certain  that  cannibalism  was  formerly  practised 

n  H   2 


468  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

a  tliird  powerful  tribe,  the  Manitivitanos,  were  also 
at  constant  strife.  But  during  the  progress  of  those 
miserable  and  bloody  feuds,  and  the  weakness  they 

by  the  aborigines  of  that  country,  as  well  as  by  those  of  Brazil. 
It  also  prevailed  among  many  of  the  tribes  Avho  formed  part  of  the 
Peruvian  Empire,  until  suppressed  by  the  generally  benevolent,  but 
despotic,  power  of  the  conquering  Inca  race. — In  Mexico,  the  human 
sacrifices,  celebrated  with  pompous  cruelty  by  the  Aztecs,  ended 
with  a  cannibal  feast. — And  perhaps,  if  the  veil,  which  shrouds  the 
early  history  of  mankind  in  the  !N'ew  World,  could  be  withdrawn, 
we  should  find  but  few  parts  of  it  in  which  the  horrid  custom  has 
not  at  some  time  or  other  been  practised  by  former  barbarous 
races,  either  to  gratify  a  savage  appetite,  to  strike  terror  into  foes, 
or  as  a  fit  completion  of  the  bloody  rights  of  superstition. 

Humboldt,  Avho  inquired  most  strictly  into  the  truth  of  the 
reports  he  heard,  had  overwhelming  evidence  of  the  cannibalism, 
even  at  the  date  of  his  voyage,  of  many  of  the  tribes  on  the  Upper 
Orinoco  and  its  vicinity.  They  themselves  spoke  of  it  to  him 
without  discomposure,  and  with  gestures  of  savage  satisfaction. 

Even  after  a  sojou.rn  of  some  time  at  the  missions,  it  was  found 
that  the  Indians  of  those  tribes  still  retained  the  horrid  propensity. 
An  aged  missionary  on  the  banks  of  the  Cassiquiare  complained 
to  him  that  new-comers  were,  from  that  cause,  unfit  to  take  part 
in  the  "  entradas "  against  the  unconverted  Indians.  '"'  Sufier 
them,"  said  he,  "to  take  part  in  an  incursion  to  bring  in  the 
natives,  and  you  can  scarcely  prevent  them  from  murdering  all 
they  meet,  and  hiding,"  for  cannibal  purposes,  "  some  portions  of 
the  dead  bodies." 

Those  "entradas,"  or  expeditions  for  the  so-called  "conquest  of 
souls "  (conquista  de  almas),  appear  to  have  been,  without  the 
addition  of  cannibalism,  sufficiently  repugnant  both  to  the  natural 
feelings  of  humanity  and  the  teaching  of  Christ.  The  great 
traveller  from  whom  we  quote  thus  describes  the  system  as 
practised  during  the  last  century  by  the  monks,  though  strictly 
prohibited  by  the  Spanish  laws  : — "  The  soldiers,"  of  the  mission 
garrison  sent  on  them,  "  killed  all  those  who  dared  to  resist,  burnt 
their  huts,  destroyed  their  plantations,  and  carried  away  the  women, 
children,  and  old  men  as  prisoners,"  Avho  were  distributed  among 


ETSTORICAL  SKETCH  OF  THE  INDIAN  NATIONS.  4G<J 

caused,  another  and  very  different  power  was  silently 
arising.  Missions,  destined  to  supersede  the  authority 
of  all  the  conflicting  tribes,  were  gradually  being 
established. 

The  zeal  and  courage  of  the  Spanish  monks,  by 
whom  those  missions  Avere  founded,  call  forth  the 
admiration  even  of  those  who  must  ever  differ  from 
them  in  many  points  of  doctrine,  and  could  not 
conscientiously  practise  all  the  means  they  used. 
Some  of  those  who  commenced  the  work  were  slain 
by  the  Caribs ;  but  the  perseverance  of  theii*  brethren 
overcame  all  obstacles,  and  the  most  important  points 
on  the  Orinoco,  as  well  as  on  the  Eio  Negro,  were 
occupied  in  succession.  ,  ■ 

Some  of  those  stations  were  not  missions  only,  as 
we  use  and  understand  the  term,  but  mihtary  posts, 
fortified  and  garrisoned  by  soldiers  in  the  service 
of  the  order.  One  of  those  forts  on  the  Orinoco, 
dismantled  by  the  Spanish  Government  after  the 
suppression  of  the  Jesuits,  had  three  batteries  of 
cannon.     By  these,  as  ^vell  as  by  gentler  means,  the 

the  missions  most  distant  from  tlieir  homes.  In  his  account  {derived 
from  the  Franciscan  missionaries  themselves)  of  the  "  Mother's 
rock,"  on  which  a  Guahibo  woman  was  stretched  and  flogged  for 
having  jumped  overhoard  from  the  canoe  in  wliich  she  was  being 
carried  away  from  her  cliildren  to  a  distant  station,  and  of  tlie 
wonderful  four  days'  journey  through  an  inujidated  forest  by  which 
she  succeeded  in  rejoining  them,  only  to  be  again  torn  away  and 
borne  to  a  more  distant  mission,  where  she  died  of  maternal 
anguish,  he  gives  a  sad  instance  of  the  working  of  that  minatural 
system,  which  seems  soon  to  have  superseded  gentler  means  in 
dealing  with  the  tribes  not  reduced  to  obedience. — Narrative, 
chaps,  xix.,  xxii.,  xxiii. 


470  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

missionaries  extended  tlieir  power  and  influence,  the 
milder  races  souglit  tlieir  protection  and  submitted 
to  their  governance,  while  the  bolder  tribes  were 
effectually  checked,  and  had  their  power  broken. 

Most  of  the  Caribs  who  resided  near  the  Orinoco 
were  led  by  degrees  to  attach  themselves  to  the 
missions  there.  The  stations  of  the  Catalonian  Capu- 
chins at  Upata,  and  other  places  near  the  Caroni, 
were  for  many  years  in  a  very  flourishing  condition. 
Under  the  guidance  and  authority  of  the  mission 
fathers  (who  exercised  temporal  as  well  as  spiritual 
power  over  all  within  their  bounds)  the  chiefs,  laying 
aside  the  bow  and  war-club  for  the  stafi'  or  whip, 
maintained  discipline  as  alcaydes  and  alguazils  over 
the  unruly.  The  bolder  spirits  chafed  at  the  lash, 
and  more  especially  at  the  rigid  system  of  seclusion 
which  was  enforced,  but  the  people  generally  were 
tractable  and  obedient.  Being  well  cared  for,  with 
abundance  of  vegetable  food,  and  herds  of  cattle  on 
the  plains,  they  increased  in  number,  and  in  the 
enjoyment  of  peace  and  security  must  have  been 
much  happier,  though  less  energetic  and  active,  than 
when  in  their  indejDendent,  but  savage  and  perilous 
condition. 

In  the  early  part  of  the  present  century  the  revo- 
lution destroyed  the  Spanish  power  in  South  America. 
Amidst  scenes  of  horror  those  flourishing  missions 
were  broken  up,  and  the  Indians  dispersed.  The 
families  of  Caribs  who  took  refuge  with  us,  preserve 
the  remembrance  of  diabolical  deeds  which  were  per- 
petrated at  that  time.     Some  of  the  mission  fathers, 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH  OF  THE  INDIAN  NATIONS.  471 

who  fled  the  vengeance  of  the  revolutionists,  were 
pursued  to  the  confines  of  our  colony.  Ten  were 
shot  down  at  Coroowa  Creek  on  the  Cuyuni,  while 
seeking  to  escajDC  to  Georgeto^^^n.^  A  lamentable 
fate,  yet  one  which  their  unhappy  brethren,  who  in 
Venezuela  were  barbarously  burnt  by  their  savage  and 
successful  foes,  might,  alas !  have  envied. 

During  that  period  of  missionary  power  on  the 
Orinoco,  the  Caribs  on  the  Essequibo  and  other 
eastern  rivers  still  retained  their  independence,  but 
seem  to  have  used  it  chiefly  in  the  support  or  pro- 
pagation of  slavery.  They  were  courted  and  caressed 
by  the  Dutch  colonists,  received  large  presents  from 
them,  and  rendered  them  important  services  in  re- 
turn. Their  efforts  against  the  revolted  negroes  were 
most  effectual  in  the  insm-rection  which  took  place 
in  1763,  during  the  government  of  Van  Hogenheim, 
and  lasted  eleven  months.  The  colony  of  Berbice 
was  then  nearly  destroyed ;  the  colonists,  awaiting 
help  from  Holland,  had  taken  refuge  in  the  ships  at 
the  mouth  of  the  river,  and  a  rising  of  the  slaves  in 
Demerara  and  Essequibo  was  daily  expected.  The 
Director-General  of  the  latter  rivers  engaged  the 
Caribs  to  take  arms.  Coming  throuoh  the  forests 
on  the  rear  of  the  revolters  (who  were  murdering 
and  burning  on  every  side),  and  concealing  themselves 

^  Hillliouse's  Journal  of  an  Ascent  of  the  Cuyuni. 

Schomburgk,  in  1839,  found  the  missions  on  the  Uiii^er  Orinoco 
virtually  abandoned.  Those  near  the  Cassiquiare,  were  visited 
once  in  three  years  by  a  priest  from  Angostura,  GOO  miles  distant. 
(Schomburgk's  Tours,  Joiamal  of  lioijal  Geor/nqj] deal  Society.) 


472  THE  INDIAN  TBIBE8  OF  GUIANA. 

by  day,  they  would  sally  forth  by  night,  fire  their 
thatched  roofs,  and  slaughter  the  inmates  when  they 
fled  out  in  confusion.  Their  presence  added  to  the 
horrors,  while  it  helped  to  shorten  the  period  of  that 
dreadful  struggle. 

The  Caiibs  were  also  chief  ao-ents  in  the  slave-trade 

o 

which  the  Indians  carried  on  among  themselves. 
Receiving  from  the  Dutch  or  Brazilian  traders  sup- 
plies of  knives,  fish-hooks,  beads,  looking-glasses,  and 
other  attractive  articles,  they  incited  the  various 
tribes  to  make  incursions  on  each  other,  and  pur- 
chased the  ^jrisoners  with  the  above-named  merchan- 
dise ; — not  forgetting  to  add  to  their  number  all  whom 
they  could  seize  themselves. 

In  those  expeditions  the  Essequibo  Caribs  would 
ascend  the  Rupununi  and  other  streams  leading  to 
the  Rio  Branco,  or,  with  the  Caribs  of  Caroni,  follow 
the  route  already  described  by  portages  from  stream 
to  stream  towards  the  head  of  the  Orinoco,  and  thence 
to  the  Rio  Negro,  to  meet  the  Brazilian  Portuguese, 
who  were  the  chief  promoters  of  this  Indian  slave- 
trade,  and  purchased,  or  as  it  was  termed,  "  ransomed," 
the  slaves  they  had  procured.  To  give  an  appearance 
of  equity  to  this  trafiic,  monks  accompanied  the  troop 
of  "  ransomers,"  to  examine  whether  those  who  sold 
the  slaves  had  a  right  to  do  so,  by  having  made  them 
prisoners  in  open  war.^ 

The  mind,  wearied  and  pained,  turns  from  the 
horrors    of    Indian   life   which    prevailed   in    Guiana 

1  Humboldt's  Narrative,  chaj).  xxiii. 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH  OF  THE  INDIAN  NATIONS.  473 

during  tlie  last  century,  and  wliicli,  in  the  remoter 
districts,  still  exist  in  some  degree.  AVe  cannot 
"wonder  tliat  under  such  cu'cumstances  many  of  the 
weaker  tribes  should  have  become  extinct,  and  the 
stronger,  the  very  Caribs  themselves,  rapidly  diminish 
in  numbers.  : 

For  the  spiritual  good  of  that  tribe,  little  was,  or 
could  have  been,  done  in  Dutch  Guiana,  under  the 
state  of  things  which  then  prevailed.  One  exception, 
however,  meets  the  eye.  Some  of  the  Caribs,  who 
on  the  Corentyi]  went  to  kill  or  expel  the  Moravian 
Daehne,  being  moved  by  his  meek  l)ehaviour,  were 
led  to  receive  Christian  instruction  from  him ;  but 
that  good  influence  ceased  when  the  Mora\dan  Indian 
stations  were  given  up,  and  until  the  establishment 
of  our  Church  Missions  no  further  efibrts  were  made 
for  theii-  conversion. 

The  superficial  glance  we  have  here  taken  at  the 
career  of  this  remarkable  race, — called  by  Sir 
AV.  Ealeigh,  who  knew  them  well,  "  a  naked  people,  but 
valiant  as  any  under  the  sk}^," — shows  us  then'  fierce 
indomitable  spirit,  which  enabled  them  to  conquer 
many  tribes,  overrun  a  vast  territory,  and  ofi"er  a 
stubborn  resistance  even  to  European  arms  and  disci- 
pline. But  we  see  them  remaining  still  rude  and 
savage,  from  first  to  last  of  their  independent  exist- 
ence. There  arose  among  them  no  master  spirit 
who,  combining  the  wisdom  of  the  legislator  with 
the  bravery  of  the  warrior,  might  have  established 
humane  and  civilizing  institutions  among  his  2)cople, 
and  permanently  united  theii*  scattered  hordes.      In 


474  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

great  emergencies  tlie  necessity  for  united  action  led 
them  readily  to  follow,  and  implicitly  obey,  some  one 
of  their  chiefs,  invested  by  themselves  with  supreme 
authority,  like  a  Dictator  of  ancient  Kome ;  but  at 
other  times  each  petty  head  of  a  clan  or  family 
moved  and  acted  in  a  great  measure  as  he  pleased, 
there  being  no  central  power,  or  hereditary  authority, 
sufficiently  respected  to  command  the  obedience  of 
all.  Having  thus  no  permanent  bond  of  cohesion, 
their  wild  hordes  could  only  fight,  overrun,  oppress, 
and  destroy,  and  in  their  highest  prosperity  were 
incapable  of  accomplishing  any  great  and  useful 
work  which  might  have  remained  as  their  memorial 
to  future  ages. 

The  Kapohn  (Acawoios,  Waikas,  &c.)  claim  kindred 
with  the  Caribs.  The  affinity  between  their  respective 
dialects  has  been  already  shown.  ^  But  though  the 
resemblance  is  so  great,  as  to  indicate  a  common 
parent  stock,  there  is  a  considerable  diffi3rence  between 
them  as  at  present  spoken. 

The  same  diffisrence  is  also  observable  in  their 
national  character.  The  Acawoios,  though  resolute 
and  determined,  are  less  hasty  and  impetuous  than 
the  Caribs  in  forming  their  designs,  and  more 
cautious  in  their  execution.  They  are  also  less 
haughty  towards  the   other  tribes,   with  whom  they 

Note  B. — Humboldt  points  out  the  same  affinity  "with  the  Caiibi 
in  the  dialect  of  the  Tamanacs  of  the  Orinoco,  and  that  of  the 
Chayma  Indians  to  the  north  of  that  river.  It  may  be  found  also 
in  the  languages  of  other  inland  tribes  as  far  south  as  the  IJio 
Branco  (the  Wapisiana  being  an  exception),  but  is  not  found  in 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH  OF  THE  INDIAN  NATIONS.  475 

maintain   friendly    relations    over   a   wide    extent  of 
country. 


tliose  of  the  tribes  Avhich  inhabit  our  coast.     The  following  table 
of  four  important  words  in  various  dialects  will  show  tliis  :  — 


Carib  of  St.  Vincent 
Carib  of  Guiana  .    . 


Ij;la>T) 

Tribes. 


Coast 
Tribes. 


Tamaiiac 
Chayma . 


Kapohn  or  Acawoio 
(various  branches) 

Macusi  ..... 
Arecuna  .... 
Paiamuna  .  .  . 
Maiongkong    .     .     . 


Wapisiana 
Arawak  . 


I  AraA 
I  War 


Sun. 


Wayeu 

Weyu 

Weyu 

,Wiyenu 

Wiy 
IWey 

Wey 

Wey 

Wey 

Shi 

(Wey,  or 
I    Wamu 

AdaiU 


yenu  -j 

yeyu  \ 

'V  -' 


Moon. 


Karti* 

Nimo 

Niina 
Nuna 

Kapui 

Kainii 

Kapui 

Kapui 

Nona 
rKaer,  or 
I.    Kairi 
I  Kartchi,  * 

Wanika 


tchi,*  ■> 
r  Kaci ) 


Fire. 


Wartu 
jWatu,  or) 
<•    Uatu  ) 

Uapto 
Apoto 

fAlipoh,  or- 
<■    Alipok    . 

Ahpoh 
Ahpoli 
Ahpoli 
Watu 

Tikahri 

Ikihi 
Eykuno 


Water. 


Douna 

Tona 

Tuna 
Tuna 

Tona 

Tona 

Tona 

Tona 

Tona 
fWuni,  or 
I    Wiami 

Oniabu 

Ho 


From  the  above,  and  other  evidence,  the  Caribi  would  appear 
to  belong  to  a  large  family  of  dialects  spread  over  the  interior  of 
Guiana,  and  extending  beyond  the  Orinoco.  If  their  race  came 
originally  from  Florida,  they  must  certainly  have  commenced  their 
descents  at  a  very  early  period,  to  have  imparted  their  language  to 
so  many  others. 

But  it  is  difficult  to  believe  that  so  many  inland  tribes  could 
either  have  partly  descended  from,  or  would  in  any  great  degree 
have  acquired  the  tongue  of,  a  sea- roving  or  invading  horde ; 
especially  while  the  coast-tribes  did  not. 

Might  not  the  island  Caribs,  according  to  their  own  tradition, 
have  been  an  offshoot  from  a  common  j^arent  stock,  once  settled  in 
Guiana,  but  long  since  broken  up,  the  same  perhaps  which  carved  the 
sculptures  on  the  rocks  in  the  interior,  which  hieroglyphics  the 
Caribs  in  their  migrations  would  naturally  imitate  1  This  would 
in  a  great  measure  reconcile  the  conflicting  opinions  of  Humboldt 
and  Schomburgk  respecting  those  sculptures. 

Carvings  resembling  those  of  Guiana,  and  a  language '  bearing  a 
close  affinity  to  a  family  of  dialects  spoken  there,  mark  the  abode  of 


476  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

While  tlie  Caribs  liave  for  more  than  a  century 
"been  declining  in  numbers  and  power,  those  races 
which  claim  kindred  with  them  have  succeeded,  not, 
indeed,  to  their  power  and  reputation  as  warriors, — to 
which  circumstances  have  been  unfavourable, — but  to 
the  position  they  occupied  as  leaders  in  the  traffic 
which  the  Indian  tribes  carry  on  Avitli  each  other. 

Of  their  history,  as  distinct  from  that  of  the  Caribs, 
little  can  be  gathered  from  their  traditions. 

They  chiefly  commemorate  the  deeds  of  a  famous 
leader,  named  Orawimara,  and  a  valiant  champion 
called  Piapu,  or  "  the  stump,"  from  his  sturdy  thick- 

the  Caribs  iu  the  islands.  If  tliey  were  "  valiant  strangers  "  on  the 
coast  of  llorida,  they  may  (reversing  the  usually  assumed  order  of 
conquest)  have  passed  on  from  the  Lesser  Antilles  to  the  Bahamas, 
and  from  those  islands  to  the  mainland,  found  footing,  and  for  a 
time  settled  there ; — and  when  all  their  conquests  were  lost  they 
would  naturally  seek  refuge  in  the  land  which  they  beUeved  to 
have  been  the  ancient  cradle  of  their  race,  with  which  their  inter- 
course had  never  ceased,  and  which  the  affinity  of  language  would 
show  to  be  inhabited  by  tribes  of  the  same  lineage,  at  least  in  part, 
as  themselves. 

The  importance  of  this  similitude  and  derivation  of  languages 
in  historical  researches  is  now  recognised  by  all.  Of  them, 
Dr.  Johnson  long  ago  observed,  that  "  they  not  only  add  physical 
certainty  to  historical  evidence,  but  often  supply  the  only  evidence 
of  ancient  migrations,  and  of  the  revolutions  of  ages  which  have 
left  no  written  monument  behind  them," 

Although  the  Caribs,  as  a  race,  are  now  nearly  extinct,  the 
position  they  once  occupied,  and  the  imi:iression  they  made  upon 
the  learned  in  Europe  (by  whom  the  discovery  of  their  cannibal 
habits  was  supposed  to  reflect  some  light  upon  tlie  origin  of  the 
classical  stories  of  the  Lestrygones  and  of  Polyphemus),  impart 
a  certain  uiterest  to  every  relic  of  their  progress,  whether  it  be 
an  existing  dialect,  an  imperfect  tradition,  or  a  rudely-sculptui'ed 
"Timeliri"  stoue. 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH  OF  THE  INDIAN  NATIONS.  477 

set  fioure.  Tlicsc  distin2;uislied  themselves  in  a  war 
with  the  Caribs,  wliich  was  succeeded,  or  accom- 
panied, by  a  civil  war  among  the  Kapohn  themselves. 
The  carrying  ofl'  of  a  handsome  woman  and  the 
murder  of  her  husband  are  said  to  have  occasioned 
those  struggles,  which  convulsed  for  a  long  time  all 
the  tribes  of  the  interior,  led  to  various  migrations, 
and  took  place,  as  nearly  as  we  can  judge  from  their 
very  imperfect  accounts,  six  or  seven  generations  ago. 

The  party  vanquished  in  the  civil  war,  unable 
afterwards  to  face  its  opponents  in  the  field,  and 
smarting  from  the  loss  of  its  bravest  men,  sought  to 
cut  off  the  victors  in  detail  by  private  assassmation. 
This  was  handed  down  as  a  duty  from  father  to  son, 
and  hence  have  arisen  those  murders,  or  attempts 
to  murder,  by  parties  of  from  three  to  five,  which 
have  continued  even  to  the  present  day.  They  are 
said  by  the  Indians  to  be  quite  distinct  from  the 
ordinary  Kanaima  murder,  Avhich  is  perpetrated 
according  to  superstitious  rules,  and  usually  by  a 
single  devotee. 

It  was  probably  during  those  intestine  conflicts 
that  the  Acawoios  first  settled  on  the  Upper  Deme- 
rara.  According  to  their  tradition,  one  of  their  hordes 
removed  thither  from  the  Masaruni.  The  Parawianas, 
who  originally  dwelt  on  the  Demerara,  having  been 
exterminated  by  the  continual  incursions  of  the 
Caribs,  the  Waika- Acawoios  occu^^ied  theii-  vacant  ter- 
ritory, and,  forming  an  alliance  with  the  Arawaks 
who  dwelt  below  the  falls,  successfidly  defended 
themselves  against  the  Caribs  and  all  other  invaders. 


478  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

Of  the  tribes  inhabiting  the  more  distant  parts  of 
the  interior,  our  historical  information  becomes  more 
and  more  scanty,  until  we  are  left  in  a  great  measure 
to  the  uncertainty  of  conjecture. 

The  Macusis,  probably  the  most  numerous,  are 
supposed  by  some  to  have  formerly  inhabited  the 
banks  of  the  Orinoco.  Sir  K.  Schomburgk  considers 
them  to  have  been  the  ancient  "  Orenoque-poni,"  a 
tribe  mentioned  by  Sir  W.  Kaleigh,  and  with  whom 
he  had  intercourse  in  1595.  "  Pona,  in  the  Macusi 
language,  signifies  upon,  on;  and  Kaleigh  tells  us 
that  the  nation  called  themselves  by  that  name  be- 
cause they  bordered  upon  the  Orenoque."^  They 
probably  retired  at  an  early  period  to  the  territory 
they  now  inhabit,  l)eing  little  fitted  to  contend  mth 
the  Spaniards.     This,  however,  is  only  conjecture. 

As  they  are  industrious  and  unwaiiike,  they  have 
been  the  prey  of  every  savage  tribe  around  them.  The 
AVapisianas  are  supposed  to  have  driven  them  north- 
ward, and  taken  possession  of  part  of  their  country. 
The  Brazilians,  as  well  as  the  Caribs,  Acawoios,  &c., 
have  lono;  been  in  the  habit  of  enslaving:  them. 

The  intrepid  surgeon,  Hortsmann,  who,  in  vain 
quest  of  El  Dorado,  visited  the  country  surrounding 

^  "  The  names  of  several  rivers,  points,  islands,  and  settlements 
along  tlie  Orinoco  are  decidedly  Macusi,  and  Ealeigh  mentions  the 
names  of  rivers,  villages,  and  chieftains,  which  are  of  the  same 
origin." — Schomburgk's  Eemarlcs  on  the  Languages  and  Dialects  of 
the  Indian  Tribes  inhabiting  Guiana. 

Pona  and  many  other  words  are,  however,  common  to  the 
ICapohn  and  other  tribes,  as  well  as  to  the  Macusi,  so  that  the 
above  reasoning  is  not  quite  conclusive. 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH  OF  THE  INDIAN  NATIONS.  479 

the  Lake  Amucu,  found  tlicm  settled  there  in  1749, 
and  they  have  probably  inhabited  that  region  from 
a  much  earlier  period. 

The  Aeecuxas  have  been  accustomed  to  descend 
from  the  hio-her  lands  and  attack  the  Macusis. 
There  have  been  frequent  wars  between  them,  and 
among  the  neighbouring  tribes,  but  of  the  causes  and 
progress  of  those  petty  and  miserable  feuds  little  can 
be  learned  ;  only  their  results — misery,  terror,  and 
diminution  of  numbers — are  certain  and  evident. 

This  tribe  is  said  to  have  formerly  dwelt  on  the 
banks  of  the  Uaupes  or  Ucayari,  a  tributary  of  the 
Eio   Negro.  1 

"^  It  would  be  interesting,  were  it  possible,  to  trace  the  more 
ancient  history  of  this  and  other  cognate  tribes,  and  ascertain 
whether,  at  an  early  period,  they  had  intercourse  with  the  more 
civilized  races  which  dwelt  near  the  western  shore  of  the  continent. 

"We  need  not  of  course  suppose  that  those  wild  tribes  derived 
from  the  people  of  Cuzco  or  Quito  their  taste  for  perforating  and 
wearing  large  ornaments  in  their  ears,  though  in  the  court  of  the 
Incas  a  similar  custom  prevailed,  and  widely-distended  cartilages 
were  indispensable  in  all  who  aspired  to  any  degree  of  gentility. 
But  the  alleged  use  of  the  quippos  (or  quipus)  among  the  Arecunas 
in  former  times  would  seem  to  indicate  an  intercourse  with  some  of 
the  more  civilized  nations  of  the  west.  To  a  tribe  dwelling  as  they 
then  did  on  the  Eio  ISTegro,  in  the  heart  of  the  continent,  such 
communication  was  indeed  not  impossible. 

The  Indian  races  have  long  availed  themselves  of  the  magni- 
ficent system  of  water-communication  presented  by  the  Amazon 
and  its  tributaries  for  the  purposes  of  traffic.  The  falls  and  rapids 
found  on  those  large  streams  offered  no  insurmountable  obstacles 
to  them.  Articles  produced  or  manufactured  in  one  country 
were  thus  gradually  passed  on  to  others  far  distant.  Some  have 
even  thought  that  it  was  from  Peru  that  those  "  idols  "  and  jewels 
of  gold  were  brought,  which  European  adventurers  obtained  on  the 
Orinoco  and  elsewhere,  and  which,  though  few  in  number,  gave 


480  TEE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

We  will  now  briefly  glance  at  tlie  history  of  the 
Waraus  and  Arawaks,  the  tribes  inhabiting  the  sea- 
coast. 

Of  these  the  Waraus  appear  to  have  been  the  most 
ancient  inhabitants  of  the  land.  Very  little,  however, 
can  be  gleaned  from  them  respecting  their  early 
history.  Unwarlike,  though  hardy,  they  probably 
took  up  their  abode  on  the  muddy  and  uninviting 
shores  in  consequence  of  having  been  driven  from  a 
more  pleasant  territory.  The  banks  of  the  Essequibo 
seem  to  be  pointed  out  in  their  mythical  legends 
as  the  region  in  which  they  formerly  dwelt,  but  on 
that  subject  nothing  more  certain  is  known. 

The  Tivitivas,  mentioned  by  Kaleigh,  were  probably 
a  branch  of  the  Waraus,  whom  he  calls  QuaraAvetes. 
They  are  described  by  him  as  dwelling  among  the 
islands  formed  by  the  channels  of  the  Orinoco,  which, 
being  low  and  flat,  are  exposed  to  frequent  inunda- 
tions, to  avoid  which  they  made  their  habitations  in 
the  trees,  where  the  English  navigator  was  surprised 
to  behold  their  fires,  as  he  passed  by  on  his  memorable 
expedition.^ 

While  missions  were  being  established  among  tribes 
more  distant  from  the  sea,  the  inhabitants  of  those 
swamps  continued  in   their  original   condition  :    the 

strength  to  tlieir  reports  of  tLe  riclies  of  the  land  noticed  by  Milton 
in  his  greatest  poem,  as — 

" yet  ui  spoiled 

Guiann,  whose  great  cit^  Geryon's  sons 
Call  El  rorado." 
^  See  Xo'.o,  p.  175.  • 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH  OF  THE  INDIAN  NATIONS.    481 

inundations,  AWtli  their  attendant  mud,  mosquitoes, 
and  malaria,  preventing  even  the  most  zealous  of 
the  monks  from  remainino^  among  them.  Some 
Waraus  were,  however,  led  from  the  northern  iDank  of 
the  Orinoco  to  join  the  missions  on  the  llanos  or 
plains  of  Cumana.  Those  missions  were  ravaged,  and 
some  of  their  villages  burnt,  by  the  wild  and  inde- 
pendent Caribs  in  the  years  1681,  1697,  and  1720. 
From  1730  to  1736  small-pox  greatly  diminished 
their  population,  and  the  Waraus  left  them,  returning 
to  their  native  marshes.  Some  families  however  were 
still  remaining  there  in  Humboldt's  time,  associated 
with  the  Chayma  Indians.  ^ 

The  Waraus  described  in  the  preceding  pages  have 
lived  in  their  present  swampy  territory  and  degraded 
condition  certainly  for  the  last  three  centuries,  and 
probably  for  many  pre^dous.  They  have  been 
frequently  attacked  both  by  Caribs  and  Acawoios, 
who  seem  to  have  browbeaten  and  enslaved  them 
almost  at  pleasure.  Of  late  years,  however,  that 
has  ceased  ;  and  on  one  river,  the  Manawarin, 
the  Caribs  and  Waraus  have  become  much  mixed 
by  intermarriage. 

^  Narrative,  chap.  ix. 

The  same  -writer  says  that  the  Guayqueria  Indians,  found  by 
the  companions  of  Columbus  on  the  coast  of  Cumana,  were 
originally  a  branch  of  the  AVarau  (Guarano)  nation,  and  spoke 
a  dialect  of  their  language.  Long  before  the  days  of  that  traveller 
they  had  laid  aside  their  native  tongue,  and  used  the  Spanish  ex- 
clusively. He  describes  them  as  hardy,  skilful  fishermen,  and 
in  that  respect  resembling  the  "Waraus,  but  very  superior .  to  the 
latter  in  stature,  personal  appearance,  and  civilization. 

J    I 


482  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

The  Arawaks  now  claim  attention.  They  occu- 
pied, when  first  discovered,  the  country  about  the 
mouths  of  the  Orinoco,  and  extended  along  the  coast 
to  the  eastward,  where  they  are  at  present  found. 

The  tliird  voyage  of  Columljus,  in  1498,  brought 
him  to  the  shore  of  the  Southern  continent.  In  his 
first  interview  with  the  natives,  they  displayed  a 
mixture  of  boldness  and  caution,  differing  both  from 
tbe  headlong  ferocity  of  the  Caribs,  and  the  timidity  of 
the  people  of  Hayti,  on  first  meeting  the  white  men. 

While  his  little  fleet  lay  at  anchor  before  the  narrow 
strait  which  divides  the  island  of  Trinidad  from  the 
main  land,  a  canoe  approached  with  twenty-five  men, 
who  at  some  distance  rested  on  their  paddles  and 
bailed  the  ships.  They  were  all  young  men,  well 
formed,  and  naked,  except  that  they  wore  bands  and 
fillets  of  cotton  about  their  heads,  and  cloths  of  the 
same  about  their  loins.  Their  arms  were  bows  and 
arrows,  tbe  latter  feathered,  and  pointed  with  bone. 
They  had  also  bucklers,  which  had  not  hitherto  been 
seen  among  the  natives  of  the  New  World,  but 
whicli  appear  to  have  been  in  use  on  this  part  of 
the  continent. 

For  two  hours  they  remained  at  a  distance,  gazing 
at  the  ships.  At  length  the  Admiral,  wishing  to 
attract  them,  made  his  ship-boys  dance  on  the  deck, 
while  the  men  sang  to  the  sound  of  the  tabor.  But 
this  had  quite  a  contrary  efl^ect,  for  the  Indians 
mistook  it  for  a  war  dance,  and  seizing  their  bows  and 
bucklers,  discharged  a  shower  of  arrows,  which,  being- 
answered  by  the  Spanish  cross-bows,  they  took  to  flight. 


HISTORICAL  SKUTCII  OF  THE  INDIAN  NATIONS,    483 

Notwitlistaiuli ng  tliis  repulse,  having  been  opposed 
only  by  weapons  similar  to  their  own,  and  kno wing- 
as  yet  nothing  of  fire-arms,  they  readily  approached  a 
smaller  vessel,  and,  running  under  the  stern,  entered 
into  a  parley  with  the  pilot,  who  made  their  chieftain 
a  present  of  a  cap  and  mantle.  Being  delighted  with 
these,  he  invited  the  Spaniard  to  land,  giving  him 
to  understand  that  he  should  be  well  entertained,  and 
receive  large  presents  in  return.  But  Avhen  the  pilot 
went  in  his  boat  to  ask  the  Admiral's  permission,  the 
Indians,  fearing  treachery,  darted  off"  in  their  canoe, 
and  were  no  more  seen. 

The  following  circumstance,  mentioned  by  Ealeigh, 
must  have  occurred  at  this  time.  Speaking  of  the 
mistakes  which  are  made,  from  ignorance  of  the  native 
languages,  respecting  the  names  of  hitherto  unknown 
regions,  he  says,  "The  same  happened  to  the  Spaniard 
in  asking  the  name  of  the  island  Trinidado ;  for  a 
Spaniard,  demanding  the  name  of  that  selfsame 
place  which  the  sea  encompassed,  they  answered 
*  Caeri,'  which  signifieth  an  island. "  ^  As  the  word 
"  Caeri,"  or  "Kaieri,"  in  the  language  of  the  Arawaks, 
signifies  an  island,  it  must  have  been  with  that 
nation  that  Europeans  first  held  intercourse  on  the 
shores  of  the  Southern  continent  of  America. 

The  Arawaks  seem  to  have  been  at  that  period 
numerous  and  powerful.  They  have  been  called  by 
some  writers,  who  had  little  or  no  personal  acquaint- 
ance with  them,  "  a  nation  of  Caribs  ;  "  but  they  are 
of  a  race  which  differs  considerably  from  the  Caribs 
1  Ealeigli's  History  of  the  World,  book  i.  cliap.  viii.  sect.  15. 

I  I  2 


484  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

of  Guiana  iu  person,  features,  and  habits,  and  still 
more  in  language.  No  two  Indian  races  in  tliat  part 
of  the  continent  are  more  distinct. 

The  Caribs  had  a  tradition,  that  the  Indians  whom 
they  conquered  in  the  smaller  West  Indian  islands, 
exterminating  the  males,  as  has  been  related,  were 
Arawaks.  The  original  island  race,  to  which  the  latter 
belonged,  is  said  by  some  to  have  come  from  Florida 
long  before  that  invasion.  Of  that  unfortunate  race 
the  Arawak  branch  in  Guiana  seems  to  be  the  sole 
existing  representative ;  the  inhabitants  of  the  larger 
islands  having  long  since  perished  under  the  oppressive 
yoke  of  the  early  Spanish  colonists. 

The  above  opinions  respecting  their  origin  rest 
partly  on  tradition,  are  greatly  supported  by  the 
similarity  of  language,*"'  and  seem  to  be  confirmed  by 

jSToTE  C. — The  laug^^age  of  the  Arawaks  possesses  considerable 
affinity  to  that  spoken  by  the  aborigines  of  the  larger  islands. 
The  feAv  words  of  the  latter,  of  which  the  meanings  are  given 
in  works  written  in  English,  show  this  resemblance. 

The  word  ciba,  in  the  language  of  Hayti,  signified  a  stone 
(living's  Columbus,  book  vi.  chap.  v.).  Cibao,  which  was  the 
name  of  a  rocky  district  in  that  island,  is  said  also  to  signify  a 
stone,  and  is  evidently  derived  from  the  other.  The  Arawaks  call 
a  stone  siba,  and  have  given  that  name  to  a  well-known  rocky 
place  on  the  banks  of  the  Demerara. 

Bohio  was  the  word  used  by  the  people  of  Cuba  to  express  the 
populousness  of  Hayti  (Ibid,  book  iv.  chap.  iv.).  It  has  been  said 
to  mean  "  house"  ("  cottages,''"  according  to  some).  It  seems  to  be 
identical  with  the  Arawak  phrase  boMo  or  bohyo,  a  common  abbre- 
viation of  bawhu-yuho,  "  house-many,"  a  term  always  used  to 
denote  a  place  where  there  are  many  human  habitations. 

By  the  word  Ciibanaaia  was  designated  a  province  in  the 
centre  of  Cuba,  nacaii  in  their  language  signifying  "  the  niidft " 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH  OF  THE  INDIAN  NATIONS.    485 

the  position  of  this  tribe  on  the  coast-line  of  Guiana, 
which  is  such  as  would  naturally  be  occupied  1)}-  a 
people  who  at  one  time  possessed,  or  had  close  con- 
nexion with,  the  Antilles. 

Dwelling  on  the  north-eastern  coast  of  the  Southern 
continent,  they  were  continually  attacked  by  the 
Caribs  from  the  islands.  Those  of  Tobago,  beino- 
nearest,  were  most  troublesome.  Their  attacks  at 
length  led  to  reprisals,  and  expeditions  to  destroy 
that    nest  of  cannibal   pirates.      After    a   long    and 

(Ibid,  book  v.  chap.  iii.).  The  Arawaks  use  the  word  duaca  v  in 
a  similar  sense,  anakabo  n  signifying  "  in  the  midst." 

A(/i.  This  was  the  name  of  the  jjepper  of  the  Indians,  which 
the  Spaniards  learned  from  the  people  of  Hayti  to  use  as  an  im- 
portant article  of  food  (Ibid,  book  v.  chap.  ii.).  The  Arawiiks  call 
pepper  by  a  similar  name. 

The  guana  was  first  discovered  in  the  islands,  and  so  called  by 
the  natives.     The  Arawaks  call  it  i/uana. 

The  islanders,  neglecting  the  Supreme  Eeing,  like  the  Indians  of 
Guiana,  addressed  themselves  to  inferior  deities.  These  they  called 
Cemi  or  Zemi,  and  the  priest  who  consulted  them  was  called  Butio. 
To  this  last  title  I  have  been  unable  to  discover  any  resemblance  in 
the  language  of  the  Arawaks,  but  the  word  semi^cici,  by  which  they 
call  their  sorcerers,  is  evidently  derived  from  the  cemi  or  zeini  of 
the  islanders.  In  many  points  their  character  and  office  exactly 
correspond. 

The  word  hiama,  "  two,"  used  by  the  Caribs  in  Dominica,  Avas 
a  relic  of  the  language  of  the  original  inhabitants  of  that  island, 
preserved  by  the  women  taken  as  wives  by  the  Caribs  after  their 
conquest.  It  is  also  a  pure  Arawak  word,  and  of  the  same  origin 
with  those  preserved  in  the  language  of  the  Caribs  of  St.  Vincent, 
as  mentioned  in  a  preceding  note. 

In  the  word  acaera,  "  island,"  used  by  the  females  of  the  latter, 
we  see  again  the  caeri  of  the  Arawaks,  their  husbands  using  the 
word  oubdo  (similar  to  the  pa/io  or  opahioo  of  our  ('aribs  and 
Acawoios),  to  denote  an  "island." 


486  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

desperate  struggle^  the  Caribs  were  beaten,  and  finally 
obliged  to  leave  tliat  island  to  avoid  tlie  pursuit  of 
the  Arawaks.  They  withdrew  to  St.  Vincent  and  the 
neighbouring  islands,  from  whence  expeditions  against 
the  main  land  continually  issued,  which  called  at 
Tobago  to  refresh  themselves  on  their  way.  ^ 

Sir  Walter  Kaleigh,  in  the  account  of  his  expedition 
in  1595,  mentions  his  meeting  some  Ai-awaks  in  the 
Amana  (or  Manamo)  mouth  of  the  Orinoco,  and  that 
he  was  guided  by  them  to  the  main  river.  He  speaks 
of  the  intercourse  between  them  and  his  people  as  of 
a  friendly  and  virtuous  character ; — the  latter  being 
probably  of  rare  occurrence.  Those  whom  he  met 
appear  to  have  been  already  reduced  by  the  Spaniards 
to  a  state  of  vassalage,  and  it  is  probable  that  as  the 
latter  race  began  to  settle  on  the  banks  of  that  river, 
most  of  the  Arawaks  went  along  the  coast  eastward 
to  avoid  them.  They  were  found  there  by  Harcourt 
and  other  English  captains,  in  the  beginning  of  the 
seventeenth  century. 

The  Arawaks,  being  intelligent,  and  jDossessing  a 
strong  national  feeling,  have  preserved  several  tradi- 
tions of  conflicts,  which  took  place  on  the  main  land, 
])etween  their  tribe  and  its  various  enemies. 

They  have  an  indistinct  remembrance  of  cruelties 
perpetrated  by  the  Spaniards,  clothed  and  armed  with 
"  siparari "  or  iron,  who  hunted  their  forefathers 
through  the  forests  with  ferocious  dog^s. 

But  l)y  far  the  greater  number  of  their  traditions 
relate  to  engagements    between    themselves   and  the 
1  Eaynal,  book  xiv.  ^  Martin's  West  Indies,  p.  257. 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH  OF  THE  INDIAN  NATIONS.    487 

Caribs.  A'arious  places  are  pointed  out  as  the  spots 
where  they  occurred.  They  seem  to  have  suffered 
much.  The  head  of  the  Arapaiaco  is  said  to  have 
been  the  scene  of  a  horrid  massacre  on  one  occasion, 
when  the  Caribs  suddenly  came  on  in  great  force  to 
exterminate  their  tribe,  together  with  the  Waraus. 
A  desperate  and  bloody  struggle  also  took  place  near 
the  head  of  Ituribisi,  in  Avhich  the  Arawaks  were 
overthrown  and  lost  many  of  their  best  men. 

Civilized  nations  take  more  pleasure  in  the  remem- 
brance of  victories  than  in  recording  defeats,  and  this 
feeling  is  fully  shared  by  the  rude  Indian.  Accord- 
ingly, the  circumstances  of  some  successful  encounters, 
which  checked  the  progress  of  their  foes,  are  still 
remembered  and  spoken  of  with  pride  among  the 
Arawaks  to  the  west  of  Essequibo, 

One  of  these  is  said  to  have  occurred  in  the  swampy 
district  near  the  Waini,  whither  the  Arawaks  had  re- 
treated from  various  parts  of  the  country.  Expecting 
to  be  followed  by  the  Caribs,  they  all  placed  them- 
selves under  the  command  of  one  chief,  a  man  of 
experience  and  skill. 

This  leader  placed  his  men  in  ambush  among  the 
islands  of  a  lake  or  "wet  savannah,"  through  which 
the  invaders  must  of  necessity  pass.  He  there  stationed 
a  line  of  watchmen,  to  communicate  by  signals  the 
tidings  of  their  approach,  so  that  his  warriors  might 
be  prepared  to  receive  them. 

The  Caribs  had  a  o^reat  number  of  war-canoes  of  larofe 
size,^  which  followed  each  other  in  line  through  the 

^  The  war-canoes  with  which  the  Caribs  ravaged  the  coast  and 


488  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

mazy  channels  of  the  savannah.  As  they  rounded  a 
certain  island,  their  red-painted  warriors  in  the  first 
canoe  were  transfixed  by  a  shower  of  arrows  from  an 
unseen  enemy  on  both  sides  of  them,  and  totally  dis- 
abled. Those  in  the  second  canoe  shared  the  same 
fate  ;  the  others,  who  could  not  see  what  had  happened, 
hurried  forward  to  ascertain  the  cause  of  the  cries, 
but  each,  on  arriving  at  the  fatal  spot,  was  saluted 
with  a  deadly  shower  of  arrows.  The  Araw^aks  then 
rushed  from  their  ambush,  grappled  the  canoes,  and 
fought  till  their  victory  was  completed. 

It  is  said  that  only  two  Caribs  survived,  whose 
lives  were  spared,  and  they  were  dismissed  by  the 
Arawak  leader  on  promise  of  a  ransom  to  be  paid  in 
cotton  hammocks,  for  the  manufacture  of  which  their 
nation  is  noted.  They  were  also  requested  by  the 
elated  victors  to  assemble  their  countrymen,  and,  if 
they  should  find  them  still  desirous  of  war,  to  "  bring 
them  on  a  similar  expedition,  that  they  might  share 
the  same  fate." 

An  old  chief  of  the  Arawaks  told  me  that  the  spot 
where  the  bodies  of  the  slain  were  interred  is  still 
marked  by  the  traces  of  three  mounds,  which  were 
pointed  out  to  him  when  a  boy.^ 

rivers  seem  to  have  contained  alDout  thirty  men  each.  Some  used 
in  the  islands  were  much  larger.  One  found  at  Jamaica  was  96 
feet  long  and  8  feet  broad,  yet  made  of  a  single  tree.  Those  large 
canoes  had  cabins  in  the  centre,  and  were  adorned  with  carving 
and  painting. 

^  The  above  tradition  I  have  heard  from  several  individuals. 
The  most  circumstantial  account  was  given  by  an  Arawak  woman, 
who  spoke  English  well,  and  Avas  also  a  mistress  of  the  Warau 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH  OF  THE  INDIAN  NATIONS.    489 

At  one  time  the  Caribs  from  the  Esseqiiibo  made 
periodical  incursions  into  the  Pomeroon  district, 
compelling  the  inhabitants  to  fly  before  them,  and 
carrying  ofi"  prisoners  and  spoil.  Wearied  at  length 
by  those  continual  aggressions,  the  Arawaks  of  that 
river  determined  to  fly  no  more  to  the  swamps,  but 
to  make  a  resolute  stand  for  the  defence  of  their 
homes.  On  the  banks  of  a  rivulet  called  Tuyuro- 
konelli,  they  accordingly  erected  a  house  to  serve  as 
a  citadel  and  magazine.  This  they  surrounded  with 
a  rude  fortification  of  felled  trees,  with  their  branches 
pointing  outwards,  and  stored  therein  an  abundant 
supply  of  arrows,  the  produce  of  one  year's  manu- 
facture, in  which  all  hands  had  been  employed. 
There  assembling  at  the  usual  season  of  invasion, 
they  awaited  the  coming  of  the  Carib  flotilla. 

The  invaders  were  induced  to  land  by  the  ajDpear- 
ance  of  a  small  party  on  the  banks  of  the  Pomeroon, 
Following  these  they  came  to  the  house,  which  was 
guarded  by  the  main  body  of  the  Arawaks,  who 
were  ranged  behind  their  breastwork,  and  provided 
with  large  wooden  bucklers.^  With  these  they  caught 
or  turned  aside  most  of  the  arrows  which  the  Caribs, 
unable  to  come  to  close  quarters,  showered  upon 
them  to  drive  them  from  their  defences.     Their  plan 

tongue,  I  found  lier  sitting  "by  the  dead  body  of  a  Warau  man, 
and,  in  the  manner  of  the  Irish  "keeners,"  chanting  with  melan- 
choly cadence  an  address  to  his  departed  spirit. 

^  The  above  is  the  only  tradition  1  have  heard  from  the  Indians 
in  which  bucklers  are  mentioned,  though  we  know  from  the  ac- 
count of  Columbus  that  they  were  in  use  among  the  natives  of  the 
coast  of  Guiana. 


490  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES,  OF  GVIANA. 

was  to  reply  sparingly  to  this  discliarge,  but  maintain 
their  position  without  flinching,  till  their  enemies' 
supply  of  shafts  should  fail.  When  from  that  cause 
the  attack  of  the  latter  slackened,  the  Arawaks 
commenced  theirs  in  earnest,  their  archers  being 
rapidly  supplied  by  the  women  and  boys  from  the 
ample  store  they  had  provided.  The  Caribs  suddenly 
found  themselves  exposed  to  a  continuous  stream  of 
missiles,  by  which  their  foremost  warriors  were  imme- 
diately stricken  down.  Eeluctantly  they  gave  way. 
In  the  retreat  which  followed  they  lost  many  more, 
iind  were  sorely  harassed  until  they  had  quitted  the 
river. 

This  repulse  did  not  stop  their  predatory  incur- 
sions, though  it  probably  rendered  them  more 
cautious.  The  Arawaks,  on  the  contrary,  became 
more  confident,  and  offered  a  bolder  resistance. 

The  great  swamp  at  the  head  of  the  Moruca  was 
often  the  scene  of  those  sanguinary  struggles.  Near 
Parakisa,  and  other  settlements  on  its  banks,  the  old 
Indians  point  out  spots  where  the  bodies  of  the  slain 
were  buried. 

One  of  the  last  fights  between  the  Arawaks  and 
Caribs  took  place  on  the  well-shaded  stream  called 
Haimara-Cabura,  near  Waramuri  hill.  The  former, 
by  a  well-planned  ambuscade,  again  succeeded  in 
defeating  their  invaders. 

On  that  occasion  they  had  formed  a  camp  of  refuge 
on  [a  suitable  hill,  a  little  distance  from  the  mouth 
of  the  stream,  and  thither  all  the  families  of  their 
tril^e    repaii'ed    when    the    alarm    of    invasion    was 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH  OF  THE  INDIAN  NATIONS.    491 

oiven.  The  warriors  assembled  on  a  risino-  o;round 
near  the  river,  and  lined  the  thick  forest  on  its 
bank.  They  had  .&mly  fixed  a  huge  piece  of 
timber  across  the  dark  stream,  at  such  a  depth  that 
large  canoes  could  only  pass  by  being  hauled  over, 
while  smaller  ones  could  glide  over  without  impe- 
diment. 

The  invading  horde  of  Caribs  on  this  occasion 
came  from  the  Orinoco,  by  way  of  the  Barima  and 
Waini.  But  so  good  a  watch  had  been  kept,  and 
so  complete  were  the  arrangements  made  to  avoid 
them,  that  they  found  but  empty  houses  as  they 
passed  along.  Crossing  the  large  swamp  above- 
mentioned  with  their  well-manned  canoes,  they  then 
rapidly  descended  the  Monica,  seeing  many  traces  of 
flight  in  that  direction.  At  length  their  hopes  of 
obtaining  captives  and  booty  were  raised  by  observing 
some  fugitives,  as  they  thought  (who  were  really 
decoys),  paddling  as  if  for  their  lives.  These  turned, 
as  if  for  shelter,  into  the  Haimara-Cabura,  with  the 
whole  force  of  the  invaders  in  hot  pursuit.  The 
savage  yells  of  the  latter,  with  which  they  sought  to 
unnerve  their  destined  prey,  gave  warning  to  the 
ambush  of  their  approach. 

The  pursued  party  in  their  light  skifi"  passed  over 
the  submerged  timber,  and  the  Caribs,  closely  fol- 
loAving,  mad  with  the  excitement  of  the  chase  on 
that  dark  stream,  ran  their  laroe  canoes  violentlv 
upon  it  and  into  each  other.  They  were  immediately 
thrown  into  terrible  confusion  by  the  arrows  showered 
on  them  from  the  bank  by  the  concealed  Arawaks, 


492  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

who  gained  an  easy  victory  over  tlieir  bewildered 
foes.^ 

The  Caribi  chief,  who  Avas  named  Manarrawa,  with 
some  of  his  canoes,  escaped  from  the  scene  of  conflict, 
and  returning  to  the  Orinoco,  assembled  another  force 
with  which  to  avenge  his  slain  warriors.  This  was 
encountered  on  the  Waini.  In  the  fiorht  which 
ensued,  a  valiant  Arawak,  named  Bohirasiri,  who  had 
taken  the  lead  in  the  action  and  overthrown  many, 
shot  the  Caribi  chief  through  the  nose  and  cheek 
with  a  sarapa,  or  three-pronged  arrow,  and  took 
him  prisoner  while  in  the  act  of  tearmg  it  from 
the  wound. 

In  that  disabled  condition  Manarrawa  was  brought 
by  the  victors  before  their  old  men  and  chief  warriors, 
who  asked,  "  Why  have  you  and  your  people  thus 
come  to  attack  us  1  What  harm  have  we  done  to 
you  V  To  those  questions  (in  such  circumstances 
not  very  easy  to  be  answered)  the  wounded  Carib 
replied  by  an  offer,  that  "  if  his  life  were  spared,  he 
would  cause  his  people  to  cease  from  all  wars  and 
predatory  attacks  upon  their  nation."  The  Arawdks, 
never  a  cruel  or  bloodthirsty  race,  sjoared  him  and 
fom-  other  survivors,  and  giving  them  a  canoe, 
allowed   them    to    depart   on   that  condition,   which, 

^  Hubbard,  the  head  man  of  the  Moruca  Arawaks,  took  me  to 
the  scene  of  that  fight,  and  told  me  that  his  people  belieA^e  that 
the  bones  of  the  slain  may  still  be  found  in  the  banks  or  bed  of 
the  stream,  but  that  the  fight  took  place  '^long — long — lovg  time 
before  the  birth  of  his  grandfathn;"  an  era  beyond  which  the 
Indians  cannot  correctly  fix  the  date  of  any  event,  however  well 
the  circumstances  may  be  preserved  in  their  traditions. 


HISTORICAL  SKETCH  OF  THE  INDIAN  NATIONS.    493 

they  say,  was  faithfully  fulfilled.  The  Caribs 
ackuowledgcd  the  compact  made  with  their  chief, 
and  invaded  the  Arawaks  no  more.  Serious  dif- 
ferences between  individuals  have  since  arisen,  but 
there  has  been  no  open  war  between  the  two  nations. 

The  above  are  the  historical  traditions  chiefly, 
though  not  entirely,  of  one  side.  The  reader  will 
form  his  own  judgment  of  them.  There  is  in  them 
nothing  mythological  or  incredible , — the  palm  of 
darino-  couraofe  is  allowed  to  the  invaders,  while  that 
of  skilful  conduct  is  claimed  by  the  Arawaks  for 
themselves, — and  the  main  fact  that  their  nation, 
often  attacked,  and  sometimes  defeated  with  much 
slaughter,  was  never  conquered,  is  admitted  by  all. 

Those  sanguinary  contests  took  place  before  Euro- 
peans settled  in  their  country,  at  least  in  any  great 
numbers.  The  presence  of  such  formidable  intruders 
would  naturally  give  the  Caribs  and  others  full  occu- 
pation in  endeavouring  to  drive  them  out.  The 
Arawaks,  though  at  first  opposed  to  them,  soon  saw 
that  an  alliance  would  be  more  profitable  than  war. 
They  accordingly,  first  of  all  the  Indians,  listened  to 
friendly  overtures,  and  were  rewarded  by  the  Dutch 
with  Exemption  from  slavery,  and  privileges  beyond 
those  of  other  tribes. 

Peace  was  made  about  1686,  by  Somelsdyk, 
Governor  of  Surinam,  with  all  the  Indian  tribes,  who 
in  course  of  time  became  the  allies  of  the  colonists, 
and  received  annual  presents  from  them. — The  inter- 
course thus  established  was,  however,  ruinous  to  the 
Arawaks   and   the   others.     They   were   debased   by 


494  ■     THE  INDIAN  TETBES  OF  GUIANA. 

the  use  of  ardent  spirits,  and  contaminated  by  tlie 
vices  of  civilized  men,  while  Christianity,  the  anti- 
dote to  moral  poison,  was  not  imparted  to  them. 

A  new  enemy  then  arose.  The  number  of  negroes 
who,  in  the  course  of  the  next  century,  escaped  to 
the  forests,  kept  both  colonists  and  Indians  in  alarm, 
and  gave  them  full  occupation.  Even  when  the 
colonists  had  made  peace  with  those  on  the  Saramaca, 
and  others,  acknowledged  their  independence,  and 
engaged  their  services,  by  annual  presents,  to  prevent 
others  from  joining  them,  there  still  remained  a 
feeling  of  enmity  between  the  black  man  and  the  red, 
leading  to  frequent  collision  and  bloodshed. 

It  is  painful  to  look  upon  this  sketch  of  the  history 
of  the  Indian  races  of  Guiana. — A  cloud,  more  or  less 
dense,  hangs  over  the  origin  of  each.  They  then 
appear  before  us  in  the  sixteenth  century ;  the  Caribs 
and  fiercer  tribes  attacking,  and  the  others  flying, 
or  defending  themselves  as  well  as  they  were  able  ; 
while  the  practice  of  enslaving  each  other  seems  to 
have  generally  prevailed. 

In  the  course  of  the  next  century  we  see  them 
chiefly  engaged  in  resisting  the  encroachments  of  a 
fairer  and  stronger  race,  which  arrived  from  various 
countries  of  Europe  with  more  destructive  weapons. 

In  the  eighteenth  century,  while  still  enslaving 
each  other,  we  find  them  frequently  engaged  l)y  the 
side  of  the  white  man  in  deadly  contest  with  the 
black. 

The  middle  of  the  nineteenth  century — a  period 
more   blessed  than   those   which    went    before — saw 


HISTOEICAL  SKETCH  OF  THE  INDIAN  NATIONS.    49.> 

those  various  conflicting  races  united  in  peace.  The 
Arawak,  the  Carib,  the  Warau,  the  Acawoio,  and, 
we  may  add,  in  many  instances,  the  Arecuna  and  the 
Macusi,  met  together  in  the  same  house  of  prayer 
with  the  black  man  and  tlie  white. 

May  God  continue  His  goodness,  and  extend  it 
throughout  the  land  !  May  long  cherished  antipathies 
of  race  be  laid  aside  in  obedience  to  the  Gospel  of 
Christ,  and  all  find  a  common  bond  of  brotherhood 
by  communion  in  Him,  whose  coming  was  pro- 
claimed by  the  angels'  song : — 


'"' on  earth  peace, 

Good  will  towards  men." 


CHAPTER  Xiy. 


CONCLUSION. 


Since  the  appearance  of  Europeans  in  their  land,  the 
Indian  races  have  continually  diminished  in  num- 
bers. In  Guiana,  as  in  many  other  parts  of  the 
Western  world,  it  has  been  found  that,  as  civilized 
man  has  extended  his  power,  the  aborigines  have 
dwindled  away.  It  has  been  truly  said  of  them, 
"  Their  forlorn  situation  engages  all  our  sympathy, 
— their  present  history  is  the  finale  of  a  tragical 
drama, — a  whole  race  of  men  is  wasting  away." 

In  the  foregoing  pages  we  have  seen  their  present 
state,  and  endeavoured  to  trace  some  portion  of  their 
past  history,  according  to  the  very  few  glimpses 
afforded  us.  Their  future  is  known  to  God  alone. 
It  may  be  that  some  tribes  will  expire  in  cold  and. 
gloomy  heathenism,  while  others,  as  we  hope  and 
pray  (and  in  part  behold),  may  progress  in  Chris- 
tianity and  civilization,  acquire  our  language,  become 
useful  to  the  community  at  large,  and  gradually 
forget  their  ancient  distinctions  and  animosities  in 
the  common  iiamc  of  Christian. 


( VNCL  USION.  497 

The  tribes  nearest  to  the  coast,  the  Arawaks, 
Waraus,  and  Caribs,  with  the  Acawoios  and.  their 
cognate  races,  have  been  especially  noticed  in  the 
course  of  our  narrative,  as  also,  in  a  lesser  degree, 
the  Arecunas,  Macusis,  Tarumas,  and  others.  But 
beside  those  of  whose  condition  and  progress  an 
account  has  been  given,  there  are  various  other  tribes 
(or  fragments  of  tribes),  of  which  less  is  known,  as 
they  are  more  remote  from  civilization.  Among 
them  we  find  : — 

The  Zapaeas. — These  have  arisen  from  the  inter- 
marriaoes   of    the    Arecunas   and    JMacusis.      Sir    R. 

o 

Schomburgk  supposed  them  to  be,  at  the  time  of  his 
visit,  about  three  hundred  in  number.  The  men  and 
women  of  this  tribe  (with  the  exception  of  their  chief 
and  one  young  girl)  were  so  ill-favoured  that  his 
party  called  them  the  "  Ugly  Faces."  Some  had  sore 
eyes,  others  squinted ;  some  appeared  dropsical,  and 
their  voices  were  squeaking  and  disagreeable.  Their 
houses  were  round,  but  not  pointed  at  the  top  like 
those  of  the  Macusis,  and  were  neatly  thatched 
and  clean. 

The  SoERiKONGS  are  a  tribe  which  have  sprung 
from  the  intermarriages  of  the  Arecunas  with  the 
Acawoios.  They  are,  like  the  latter,  a  predatory 
tribe,  frequently  committing  depredations  on  the  ]\Ia- 
cusis.  They  are  likewise  accused  of  being  "  Kanaima," 
and  slow  poisoners.  They  threatened  to  attack  the 
expedition  of  Schomburgk  in  1835,  and  had  formed 
a  camp  for  that  purpose,  but  afterwards  abandoned 
it,  and  allowed  the  party  to  pass  unmolested. 

K    K 


498  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  UE  GUIANA. 

The  Wapisianas  are  more  atliletic,  and  darker  in 
colour  than  the  Macusis.  Their  females  are  often 
good-looking,  and  stain  and  puncture .  the  skin  round 
the  month  in  an  elliptical  form.  Their  language 
is  very  peculiar,  and  stands  isolated  among  those  of 
the  tribes  who  dwell  near  them. 

The  Atorais  are  now  nearly  extinct.  Including  a 
sister  trihe,  the  Tauris  or  Daurts,  who  formerly  dwelt 
apart  in  the  forests,  but  are  now  united  with  them, 
the  Atorais  proljably  do  not  exceed  one  hundred  per- 
sons. They  appear  to  have  been  the  only  tribe  in 
Guiana  who  have  burnt  their  dead  upon  a  funeral 
pile.  Their  language  differs  materially  from  that 
of  the  Wapisianas,  and  those  of  the  other  neigh- 
bouring tribes. 

The  above  dwell  near  our  western  l:)oundary,  but 
there  are  others  more  remote,  whom  our  people  (the 
Acawoios  especially)  occasionally  visit.  Some  of 
them  have  been  casually  noticed,  as  the  Maiongkongs, 
who,  with  their  neighbours  the  Guinaus,  manufacture 
the  blow-pipes,  and  exchange  them  for  the  ourali 
poison  with  the  IMacusis  and  others. 

The  Oewakus  (or  Oavacas),  who,  with  the  Puri- 
GOTOS,  live  near  the  sources  of  the  Uraricapara,^  are 
in  a  most  wild  and  degraded  condition,  neither  men 
nor  women  wearing  any  ch^thing  whatever.  The 
Oewakus   arc    timid    and    despised,    while    the    fierce 

^  P)Otli  the  Uraricapara  and  the  Urariquera  (the  Parima  or  Rio 
Branco,  of  wliicli  the  former  is  a  tributary)  derive  their  Indian 
names  from  the  urarl  (ourali,  or  arrow- poison),  Avliich  is  obtained 
in  the  country  tlirougli  which  they  flow. 


i'oXCLL'SlOX.  4i)!) 

KluISHANAS  and  otliers,  ^vllo  dwell  near   the   sources 
c>f  the  Orinoco,  are  dreaded  by  all. 

Within  the  borders  of  Venezuela  and  Brazil  there 
are  also  many  other  tribes,  some  of  whom  still  practise 
cannibalism ;  while  others  are  exceedingly  ferocious, 
and  keep  all  strangers  at  a  distance.  The  Piano- 
GHOTTOS,  one  of  those  wild  races,  arc  so  averse  to 
intercourse  with  civilized  persons  that  they  have 
defeated,  and  in  some  instances  murdered,  the  crews 
of  expeditions  sent  from  the  Amazonas  to  explore 
their  territory.  The  Zaramatas  and  Deios  do  not 
differ  greatly  from  this  latter  tribe,  either  in  language 
ov  appearance,  save  that  the  Drios  tattoo  their  skins 
all  over. 

Some  of  the  Indian  races  are  now  almost  extinct ; 
as  the  Maopityans,  who,  when  visited  by  Schomburgk 
in  1843,  had  dwindled  to  thirty- nine  individuals. 
A  single  hut  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Upper 
Caphiwuin  sheltered  the  whole  nation.  The  Ama- 
itiPAS  have  entirely  perished; — in  1843  an  old  woman 
was  the  only  surviving  remnant  of  that  tribe. 

Thus,  throughout  the  w^ild  regions  of  Guiana, 
in  this  nineteenth  century  of  the  Christian  era, 
remnants  of  ancient  races  have  been  found,  scattered 
and  withering  here  and  there  like  the  dry  bones 
seen  in  the  vision  of  the  prophet.  To  many  it  has 
seemed  impossible  that  they  should  ever  be  raised 
from  their  low  estate.  But  there  is  One  with  whom 
"  all  things  are  possible."  He  has  elevated  our  oAvn 
and  other  races  once  barbarous,  and  given  them 
light  and    life.      And    we   pray  that    He   may   extend 


500  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

the  like  blessings  even  to  those  poor  scattered  frag- 
ments, and  gather  them  into  the  Chm'ch  of  His  Son, 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

"  Son  of  man,  can  these  bones  live  1 
0  Lord  God,  Thou  knowest!" 


THE    END, 


R.  CLAY,  SON,  AND  TAYI,OI!,  PRINTERS,  BREAD  STREET  HILL. 


500  THE  INDIAN  TRIBES  OF  GUIANA. 

the  like  blessings  even  to  those  poor  scattered  frag- 
ments, and  gather  them  into  the  Church  of  His  Son, 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

"  Son  of  man,  can  these  bones  live  1 
■ 0  Lord  God,  Thou  knowest!" 


THE    END. 


R.    CLAY,   SON,    AND   TAYLOI!,    PKINTEr^'!,   BREAD   STREET    HILL. 


U  X-  hahly-    Junt.  I8(IS . 


/ 


