
STOP 



Early Journal Content on JSTOR, Free to Anyone in the World 

This article is one of nearly 500,000 scholarly works digitized and made freely available to everyone in 
the world by JSTOR. 

Known as the Early Journal Content, this set of works include research articles, news, letters, and other 
writings published in more than 200 of the oldest leading academic journals. The works date from the 
mid-seventeenth to the early twentieth centuries. 

We encourage people to read and share the Early Journal Content openly and to tell others that this 
resource exists. People may post this content online or redistribute in any way for non-commercial 
purposes. 

Read more about Early Journal Content at http://about.jstor.org/participate-jstor/individuals/early- 
journal-content . 



JSTOR is a digital library of academic journals, books, and primary source objects. JSTOR helps people 
discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content through a powerful research and teaching 
platform, and preserves this content for future generations. JSTOR is part of ITHAKA, a not-for-profit 
organization that also includes Ithaka S+R and Portico. For more information about JSTOR, please 
contact support@jstor.org. 



July 18, 1884.] J J J [Gatschet. 

ent than that of the adulterated oil and was of a lighter color ; also the 
nitrous fumes rose more rapidly through the pure oil. One curious fact 
noticed about the adulterated lard oil was, it could not be completely 
saponified with caustic soda ; even when the latter was added in excess a 
clear layer of unsaponified oil remained after several trials. This test 
clearly indicated adulteration, as pure lard oil will completely saponify 
with caustic soda. Prof. Allen has proved that shark liver oil and African 
fish oil resist saponification. He tried to saponify the former oil with 
aqueous potash, with a solution of potash in absolute alchohol, and by 
heating it with solid potash, but it would not completely saponify, this he 
thinks is due to the fact that it contains a body allied to cholesterin, but 
fluid at ordinary temperatures. 

Pure lard oil gives with nitric acid of Sp. Gr. 1.33 a yellow color 
approaching orange. 

The adulterated sample of lard oil with nitric acid of the same strength 
gave a distinct brown color on standing. That portion of the oil which 
resisted saponification with caustic soda was treated with nitric acid, and it 
soon became of a deep coffee brown color, much darker than the above. 

The determination of specific gravity is the most important of the phys- 
ical tests.. The viscosity of an oil is a highly important feature, but in 
order to be of any value in testing much care must be observed ; both oils 
must be brought to the same temperature and kept so while flowing. Both 
the adulterated and the pure lard oil were subjected to this test, they were 
brought to a temperature of 81P F. and 5 c. c. of each oil was passed 
through a capillary tube. The pure oil required 960 seconds to pass 
through, while the adulterated oil required 1080 seconds. The experi- 
ment was repeated several times with different tubes, but the ratio of the 
times of flowing was constant. Both oils were subjected to a temperature 
of 32° P. When the pure oil was frozen it was more coherent and firm 
and much lighter in color ; the adulterated sample was quite yellow. 
When the adulterated oil slowly became liquid a layer of yellow oil formed 
first, which was quite different in appearance from the other portion and 
was evidently the adulterant. 

While we cannot depend on any single test, the evidence afforded by 
several is often conclusive and satisfactory, and in this case it was acknowl- 
edged afterwards that cotton seed oil was one of the adulterants. 



THE ARUBA LANGUAGE AND THE PAPIAMENTO JARGON. 

By Alb. 8. Gatschet, Washington, D. C. 

{Bead before the American Philosophical Society, July 18, I884.) 

Aruba is the westernmost isle of the group of islands which extends 
fiom east to west along the northern coast of South America at a short 
distance from the mainland. It lies north of the peninsula of Para- 



Gatschet.] 300 [July 18, 

guana, Venezuela and north-east of the entrance to the Gulf of Mara- 
cai'bo ; it belongs to the dominion of the Dutch in the West Indies, 
which extends over the following islands : Aruba (preferable to the 
orthography : Oruba), Curacao, Curacjlla at the south-eastern cape of 
Curasao, Bonaire or Buen Aire, and the two Aves or Bird islands. 
Curac,ao is the largest island of the archipelago and consists of a barren 
rock almost devoid of vegetation ; the capital of the Dutch colony, Wil- 
helmstadt, is built upon its south-western shore. In former times the 
thrifty inhabitants accumulated wealth as the mediators of a lively 
smuggling trade between the Spanish and other colonies of the West 
Indies. Salt is now the staple produce of Curacao with its 22,000 inhabi- 
tants ; as to its size, it is nearly three times larger than Aruba, which has 
200 square kilometres and 5670 inhabitants. 

The explorer Alphonse L. Pinart, from whom the linguistic material 
printed below was obtained, visited the Curaqao group in the summer of 
1882. Although the natives of Aruba have since A. D. 1800 abandoned 
their paternal language for the Papiamento jargon, their exterior is still 
of a pure Indian type. The Aruban language was probably the same as 
that of Curacao and related to the vernacular of the peninsula of Para- 
guana. From natives far advanced in age Pinart succeeded in obtaining 
a few terms of the Aruban language and of local nomenclature, also six 
sorcerer's formulas, and from the Papiamento, as spoken at present, he 
secured a limited number of plant and animal names evidently pertaining 
to the extinct Indian dialect ; the number of these may be easily increased 
by future travelers. 

An old Aruba Indian, recently deceased, witnessed at the former Indian 
encampment at Saboneta the inhumation of a native female in one of the 
large conical ollas, her body being doubled up within the vase and the 
head protruding through the orifice. A smaller urn was then placed upon 
the head, bottom up, and the whole covered with earth. Several Aruban 
grottoes and rock-shelters yielded inscriptions and pictographs to the ex- 
plorer, who considers thoir style as related to the pictography of the 
Orinoco and Apure countries. Fragments of pottery, hatchets made of 
shells and stones, are profusedly scattered around the ancient encamp- 
ments of the native Arubans. 

The name of Curasao island seems to be the Tupi word coaracy, curass6 
sun, in Guarani quaracf ; Aruba resembles the name of a shrub which is 
called in French Guyana : arube. Nicolas Fort y Roldan, in his Cuba 
indigena (Madrid, 1881), p. 125, gives arabo as the name of a plant as 
heard once on the Great Antilles. For Curasao compare : Navarrete, Col- 
lection de los Viages, III, pp. 259. 

Nouns, verbs and sentences. 

adamudu rain 

baru xantu uou to ask for something to eat 

danshikki, danshebu sack, pouch 



1881.1 "01 [Gatschet. 

datie ! be gone ! 

kafa devil, wicked spirit 

kanla (?kaula) thing, object 

kantie baulete ! give me to eat! 

karebe spoon 

aaba dobo^edaa guayete ! sit down ! 

,tida meo ! good morning ! 

xovam. phantom, hobgoblin 

£ute kontabo ? how do you do ? 

totumba, waidanga water-gourd. 

Names given to Aruban mountains and heights : 

Aiyo, Behika, Cukuroi, Handebirari, Kasiaari, Kibaima, Kodeko- 
dektu, Malividiri, Shabaruri, Shiribana, Tarabana, Wakubana, Ya- 
barubari, Yamanota. 

Names of Aruban caves : 

Matividiri, Warerukuri, Waririkiri. 

Names of Aruban places ("endroits") : 

Antikuri, Arikurari, Bedui, Bushiribani (?), Cubari, Damari, Hen- 
dieku, Kamakuri, Kashiunti, Kausheati, Kassibari, Wariruri, Weburi, 
Yuditi. 

Names of Aruban trees : 

dabaraida ; hubada tarabada. 

Names of plants : 

dividivi fruit of Sapindus coriaria 
jobo Spondias lutea 
kaduski Oereus laniginosus 
kipopo Agaricus 
lokiloki Mimosa unguiscata 
makura Abrus precatorius 
nandu Cytisus catjan 
shimaruko Malpighia glabra 
surun Oratera gynandra 
takamahak Ragara octandra 
tuturutu Bobinia pulcherrima 
watapana Sapindus coriaria 
yoroyoro Thereiia neriflora. 

Names of fish : 

ginga Diodon atinga 
karma-u Characinus cyprinioides 
kurkur Ohmtodon fromitus 
puruntsi Serranus variolosus. 



Gatschet.] d\J& [j u l y ig, 

Names of birds : 

kinikini Cymindes illigeri 
krabete Fuliea — ? 
shushubi Orpheus amerieanus 
warawara Oathartes curasoica. 

Insects and other animals ; 
dori Rana ( — ?) 

guruguru Calandra granaria (a beetle) 
hanahana Formica cephalota 
kimakima Oassiopea frondosa (a rhizopod) 
kumexen Termes fatalis 
lembelembe Conops sanguisuga (a dipteron) 
mamondenga Ichneumon niger 
paluli Mytilus edulis 
waltaka lizard. 

Several of these names are formed by duplication of the (dissyllabic) 
radix, a process occurring in many languages to indicate fbrmation by 
onomatopoesy, or diminutive nouns, or objects existing in large numbers. 

exorcist's or conjurer's formulas. 

Maledictory formula : ,\-erebete den kafa magolotchi. 

For frightening children : tue daye datie' gidio' dimi gurio yatabo. 

Two formulas to remove cactus-spines from the human body : (1) una areya 

rafayete dudrea ebanero abono, caburo copudabo daburi. 

(2) yuni roba rapebo tchaba na aripebo, duda banabo pebo, home 

daba burvo, damei bo bakuna, daodao fuda dada. 
Formula to remove fish-bones or other obstructions from the throat : vidie 

pahidie, maranako tubara tchira deburro, hadiira karara. 
Formula for hunting the iguana : Sako den komanari manadi watapuna 

f&fa na douere sadii na ditieri. 

When A. L. Pinart gathered these formulas, he found it impossible to 
obtain any interpretation for the single words. When I remarked to him 
that such formulas of sorcery were often made up of unmeaning sounds 
and words, he scouted the idea, and said these sentences were literal quo- 
tations from the extinct Aruban tongue. It will be noticed that several 
words in them occur in the lists above : kafa, datie, watapuna (cf. wata- 
pana). In the formula preceding the last one, some rhythm resembling 
assonance is perceptible. 

In making a study of the above lists, I have endeavored to classify the 
lost Aruba language among some of the circumjacent linguistic families. 
But the peculiar selection of the terms, which are very uncommon, the 
paucity and probable disfiguration of them in the mouth of the uneducated 
people have not permitted to find any other but passing analogies with the 



1884.] "Od [Gatschet. 

above. Goajiro, which is spoken from the point of the Goajira peninsula 
down to the Gulf of Darien in various dialects, yielded the following ; 

Aruba : kafa devil, Goaj. yarfas, yaria, yaroja. 

All the other terms which I could compare with Goajiro, Guamaco, 
Arawak, Tupi and the extinct male and female Carib dialects of the 
Leeward islands (dialect of Guadeloupe, Diet, of Rev. Raym. Breton, 
1665) differed entirely from Aruba. Hage, the generic term for ant in the 
insular Carib, may be compared with hanahana, Formica cephalota of 
Aruban. 

The Papiamento. 

On account of the peculiar selection and association of their ingredients, 
and the grammatic changes which the terms are undergoing, the jargons 
or medley languages are now being studied by linguists with the interest 
they deserve. The best known jargons of America are the conversational 
Tupi or lengoa geral, the various negro jargons of Guyana, of the West 
Indies and of Louisiana, the Chinook jargon, etc. The main ingredient 
of Papiamento, which is spoken upon Aruba, Curacao and the rest of this 
island group, is the Spanish language ; then comes Dutch, the language 
of the Netherlandish rulers, and least in frequency are the words of Indian 
origin. 

The character of this medley speech will best appear from extracts taken 
from a "Conversational Guide," published at Curacao, 1876. 

Span, comereiante : comerchanti, eajero cajeru, tenedor de libros tenedo 
di buqui, dependiente clerc, relojero dreshado di oloshi, pastelero trahado di 
pastecbi, earnecero matado di bestia, silletero trajado di stul, ojelatero 
blequero, telero seilemaker, aserrador zagdo di palu, encuadernador traja- 
do di buqui, sastre sneire (Germ. Schneider), zapatero zapatS, albanil mesla, 
herrero smet, remendador lapido, predieador domi, director de entierro for- 
lese, sepulturero coster, consejo del templo kerkerad, pulpito prekstul, comu- 
nion ricibimentu, campanero leidfi di cloc. 

The following objects of natural history are partly rendered by aboriginal 
Indian terms : Span, arbol de uva palu di dreif, arbol de mamon palu di 
quenepa, arbol de merey palu di cachu ; arbol de guayaba palu di guyaba, 
pdjaro para, yegua meri, mula mula muje, burro machu, burra buricu muje, 
mono macacu, rata yaca, pulga pruga, lombriz bichi, golondrina souchi, 
hormiga bruminga, cucaracha cacalaca, ganilan guaraguara, polio piiitu, 
pavo calacuna, papagayo lora, cienpie disinbei (Dutch), pauji pajuis, 
migajas wiriwiri, cante conufes (a fish), zavalo snuc (a fish), arenque en 
salza pequele 1 (Dutch), chimbobo guiambo, ahullama pampuna, leclioza 
papaya, aji (or chile) promente [Span, pimiento] , cambur bacoba, guanabana 
sorsaca, platano banana, chirirnona 6 rinon scopapel, pina anaza, naraja 
laraja, ciruelas preimu. 

We add a few conversational sentences : 

Debe ser tarde mest^ ta lat 

JVb espera Usted al Sr. L. ? bo no ta spera shon L. ? 



Gatschet.] "04 [ Ju i y ig, 

Ve a ver otra vez si ha venido bai ueita atrove' cu el a bini. 

El 8r. L. esta en casa t Shon L., ta na cas ? 

Ha idofuera ela vai af6 

Hablas bien bo ta papia bon 

Lo estimari siempre lo mi stimabu tur mi vida 

Quiere Usted jugar carta ? mener quiejunga carta? (mener : mynheer) 

Mo tengo ganas de jugar mi non tin gustu de junga, 

Ha comido Usted bastante t bo a come jopi ? 

Es bastante lejos ta macha aleu 

Estoy aun un poco debil ainda mi ta un poco suae 

Cuantas iglesias hai aqui t cuantu misa tin aqui ? 

Muchas en el eampo jopi na cunucu. 

The above examples plainly show that this jargon exhibits the same 
processes of linguistic deterioration as are commonly found in medley 
languages of this description. 

Three dialects may be distinguished upon Curaqao island (Guide, p. 49) : 
that of the Dutch Protestants, marked by the peculiar accent of the Hol- 
landers ; the one of the Jews, which comes nearer to the Spanish pronun- 
ciation ; the third dialect is that of the common people. The term papia- 
mento signifies talk, conversation and is derived from palabramentum, pa- 
labra being the Spanish for word, talk (from Tzapa^oXri)- The verb papia 
means to converse, speak. 

At Corsouw a weekly paper of four quarto pages was published from 
1871 to 1875 in this jargon, which bore the title : Civilisado. Courant di 
pueblo. Orden, trabouw, instruccion : — Progreso. 

Judging from the titles below transmitted by the kindness of Mr. Pinart 
the literature of this isolated form of human speech has been up to the 
present time chiefly of a devotional character : 

Quia para los Espanoles liablar papiamento, y viceversa, para que los 
de Curazao puedan hablar espaSol. Por N. N. — Curazao, imprenta del 
Comercio, 1876. 16°, 86 pages. (The title on the book-cover differs 
slightly from the inside title above.) 

Jubileo di 1875. (Curazao) 1875. 16 p., 12°. 

Historia corticoenan for di Bybel. 3" edicion. Curagao, Impr. del Vica- 

riato, 1876. 24°. 4 s edicion, 1881. 
Bida i sufrimentoe di nos Senjor Hesu Cristoe. Curacao, Impr. del Com", 

1876. 59 pp., 16°. 
Canticanan religiosa. 2" edicion. Curazao, 1879. 24°. 
Ciento cuenta corticoe. Boeke di leza pa uso di school. Curasao, Impr. 

del Vicariato, 1881. 12°. 
Boeki di leza pa uso di skool di dia domingo na Curaqao. Curacao, 1881. 

24°. 
Catechismo i doctrina cristiana pa uso di Katholieken di Curasao. Curapao, 

Imprenta di Vicariato, 1882. 24°. 



1884.1 3()o [Gatschet. 

Rekenboek pa muchanan dl CuraQao. Curazao, 1882. 24°. 

Sagrado coerazon di Hesus 6 meditaciounan pa luna di juni consagrar na 

S. coerazon i no bena na honor di es coerazon sagrado. N. L. and N. 

J. 206 pp., 32°. 

A treatise on the Papiamento jargon was published by Emilio Teza in 
the Politecnieo of Milan, Vol. xi, and also separately : 11 dialetto curas- 
sese, Pisa, 1863. 8°. 

Appendix. 
(From manuscripts transmitted by Mr. Alph. L. Pinart.) 

I. Prayer to the Holy Virgin in the Earibisi dialect (Karibisi tongo) of 

Surinam. 

Odi Maria, 

Jeretion Maria polole" genade tamoeni romo maloina amoro Kopo papo- 
rijan Kopo papori walijan Santa Maria tamoeni sano seroepa toko wango- 
nibo poko erorrie koman boko alamboe pomera. Kepobome. 

II. Lord's Prayer in the China language, as spoken on the Pacific slope of 
the Isthmus of Panama. Reproduced in a corrected form from the 
American Antiquarian, Vol. v (1883), p. 354. 

Patir nanguini, pechiqui niptalnega iiperekuichi ; 
penukaguine petakeanguine pebiluleguine ; 
pebalehas pepincheerguin, napkine pagaiopi niptalneguin ; 
maatuda nanguin pan epanegun, emigoatguine ; 
peanalchagogue animalguin, pel anniappigua ; 
peanalchugo pel anayuppigua pelibanguimbi ; 
pel imalistarguin ipeanaalchago, okuja Jesus, 
patir or papa father, nanguini our; maatuda to-day, pan bread, pe thou, 
igoat give (in emigoatguine), -guine plural suffix. 

III. Prayer to Christ in the Sambu dialect of Choco, Columbian States. 

Naniuri biaunausi zese guanadi, mune-e' mule Jesu Cristo zese umaquina 
etaupen zese redentor mune-6, maquiniamur umaquiniamur, zanaambul 
umandu caidebu tande' caidebu tand<5 caid<5, zegabur careambur troadena, 
zaum beuatde, latiguai, cauai nambicansi convezainame cumli-i penitencia 
caima majorasnane convesai naninanei. 

Pidele perdon a Dios, digas Senor mio Jesu Cristo, Dios y hombre, cria- 
dor padre y redentor mio : pesame de todo corazon de haberte ofendido 
solo por ser quien eses tan digno de ser amado, y tambien me pesa porque 
me puedas castigar en el infierno, y propongo nunca mas pecar ayudado 
de tu divina gracia, confesarme y cumplir la penitencia que me mande el 
padre confesor. 

PKOC. AMEB. PHILOS. SOC. XXII. 120. 2M. PRINTED MAT 25, 1885. 



