July IS, 1884.] 


299 


[Gatschet. 


ent than that of the adulterated oil and was of a lighter color; also the 
nitrous fumes rose more rapidly through the pure oil. One curious fact 
noticed about the adulterated lard oil was, it could not be completely 
saponified with caustic soda; even when the latter was added in excess a 
clear layer of unsaponified oil remained after several trials. This test 
clearly indicated adulteration, as pure lard oil will completely saponify 
with caustic soda. Prof. Allen has proved that shark liver oil and African 
fish oil resist saponification. He tried to saponify the former oil with 
aqueous potash, with a solution of potash in absolute alchohol, and by 
heating it with solid potash, but it would not completely saponify, this he 
thinks is due to the fact that it contains a body allied to cholesterin, but 
fluid at ordinary temperatures. 

Pure lard oil gives with nitric acid of Sp. Gr. 1.33 a yellow color 
approaching orange. 

The adulterated sample of lard oil with nitric acid of the same strength 
gave a distinct brown color on standing. That portion of the oil which 
resisted saponification with caustic soda was treated with nitric acid, and it 
soon became of a deep coffee brown color, much darker than the above. 

The determination of specific gravity is the most important of the phys¬ 
ical tests. The viscosity of an oil is a highly important feature, but in 
order to be of any value in testing much care must be observed ; both oils 
must be brought to the same temperature and kept so while flowing. Botli 
the adulterated and the pure lard oil were subjected to this test, they were 
brought to a temperature of 80° P. and 5 c. c. of each oil was passed 
through a capillary tube. The pure oil required 900 seconds to pass 
through, while the adulterated oil required 1080 seconds. The experi¬ 
ment was repeated several times with different tubes, but the ratio of the 
times of flowing was constant. Both oils were subjected to a temperature 
of 32° F. When the pure oil was frozen it was more coherent and firm 
and much lighter in color; the adulterated sample was quite yellow. 
When the adulterated oil slowly became liquid a layer of yellow oil formed 
first, which was quite different in appearance from the other portion and 
was evidently the adulterant. 

While we cannot depend on any single test, the evidence afforded by 
several is often conclusive and satisfactory, and in this case it was acknowl¬ 
edged afterwards that cotton seed oil was one of the adulterants. 


THE ARUBA LANGUAGE AND THE PAPIAMENTO JARGON. 

By Alb. S. Gatschet , Washington , D. G. 

(Read before the American Philosophical Society , July IS, ISS4.) 

Aruba is the westernmost isle of the group of islands which extends 
fiom east to west along the northern coast of South America at a short 
distance from the mainland. It lies north of tfle pepinsula of Para- 



Gatscliet.J 


300 


[July is, 


guana, Venezuela and north-east of the entrance to the Gulf of Mara¬ 
caibo ; it belongs to the dominion of the Dutch in the "West Indies, 
which extends over the following islands : Aruba (preferable to the 
orthography : Oruba), Curasao, Ouragilla at the south-eastern cape of 
Curasao, Bonaire or Buen Aire, and the two Aves or Bird islands. 
Curasao is the largest island of the archipelago and consists of a barren 
rock almost devoid of vegetation ; the capital of the Dutch colony, Wil- 
lielmstadt, is built upon its south-western shore. In former times the 
thrifty inhabitants accumulated wealth as the mediators of a lively 
smuggling trade between the Spanish and other colonics of the West 
Indies. Salt is now the staple produce of Curasao with its 22,000 inhabi¬ 
tants ; as to its size, it is nearly three times larger than Aruba, which has 
200 square kilometres and 5670 inhabitants. 

The explorer Alphonse L. Pinart, from whom the linguistic material 
printed below was obtained, visited the Curasao group in the summer of 
1882. Although the natives of Aruba have since A. D. 1800 abandoned 
their paternal language for the Papiamento jargon, their exterior is still 
of a pure Indian type. The Aruban language was probably the same as 
that of Curasao and related to the vernacular of the peninsula of Para- 
guana. From natives far advanced in age Pinart succeeded in obtaining 
a few terms of the Aruban language and of local nomenclature, also six 
sorcerer’s formulas, and from the Papiamento, as spoken at present, he 
secured a limited number of plant and animal names evidently pertaining 
to the extinct Indian dialect; the number of these may be easily increased 
by future travelers. 

An old Aruba Indian, recently deceased, witnessed at the former Indian 
encampment at Saboneta the inhumation of a native female in one of the 
large conical ollas, her body being doubled up within the vase and the 
head protruding through the orifice. A smaller urn was then placed upon 
the head, bottom up, and the wiiole covered with earth. Several Aruban 
grottoes and rock-shelters yielded inscriptions and pictograplis to the ex¬ 
plorer, who considers their style as related to the pictography of the 
Orinoco and Apure countries. Fragments of pottery, hatchets made of 
shells and stones, are profusedly scattered around the ancient encamp¬ 
ments of the native Arubans. 

The name of Curasao island seems to be the Tupi word coaracy, curass6 
sun, in Guarani quara^i ; Aruba resembles the name of a shrub which is 
called in French Guyana : arube. Nicolas Fort y Roldau, in his Cuba 
indigena (Madrid, 1881), p. 125, gives arabo as the name of a plant as 
heard once on the Great Antilles. For Curacao compare : Navarrete, Col’ 
lection de los Viages , III, pp. 259. 

Nouns, verbs and sentences. 

adamudu rain 

baru xantu uqu to ask for something to eat 

danshikki, dansliebu sack , pouch 


1881.1 


301 


[Gatschet. 


datie 1 be gone! 
kafa devil, wicked spirit 
kanla (?kaula) thing, object 
kantie baulete ! give me to eat! 
karebe spoon 

A aba dobo^edan guayete ! sit down ! 

^ida meo ! good morning ! 

;tomoi phantom, hobgoblin 
^ute kontabo ? how do you do f 
totumba, waidanga water‘gourd. 

Names given to Aruban mountains and heights : 

Aiyo, Beliika, Cukuroi, Handebirari, Kasinari, Kibaima, Ivodeko* 
dektu, Matlvidiri, Sliabururi, Sbiribana, Tarabana, Wakubana, Ya- 
barubari, Yamanota. 

Names of Aruban caves : 

Matividiri, Warerfikuri, Waririkiri. 

Names of Aruban places (“endroits”) : 

Antikuri, Arikurari, Bedui, Busliiribani (?), Cnbari, Daman, Hen- 
dieku, Kamakuri, Kasliiunti, Kausheati, Kassibari, Wariruri, AVeburi, 
Yuditi. 

Names of Aruban trees: 

dabaraida ; hubadft tarabada. 

Names of plants: 

dividivi/ruiY of Sapindus coriaria 
jobo Spondias lutea 
kaduslii Cereus laniginosus 
kipopo Agaricus 
lokiloki Mimosa unguiscata 
makura Abrus precatorius 
nandu Cytisus catjan 
sliimaruko Malpighia glabra 
surun Gratera gynandra 
takamahak Ragara octandra 
tuturutu Robinia pulcherrima 
watapana Sapindus coriaria 
yoroyoro Theretia neriflora. 

Names of fish : 

ginga Diodon atinga 
karma-u Char acinus cyprinioides 
kurkur Chcetodon fromitus 
purnntsi Scrranus variolosus. 


Gatschet.] 


302 


[July 18, 


Names of birds : 

kinikini Cymindes illigeri 
krabete Falica — ? 
shusliubi Orpheus umericanus 
warawara Oathartes curasoica. 

Insects and other animals ; 
dori liana (—?) 

guruguru Oalandra granaria (a beetle) 

hanakana Formica cephalota 

kimakima Oassiopea frondosa (a rhizopod) 

kumexen Termes fatalis 

lembelembe Oonops sanguisuga (a dipteron) 

mamondenga Ichneumon niger 

paluli Mytilus edulis 

ival taka lizard. 

Several of these names are formed by duplication of tlie (dissyllabic) 
radix, a process occurring in many languages to indicate formation by 
onomatopoesy, or diminutive nouns, or objects existing in large numbers. 

exorcist’s or conjurer’s formulas. 

Maledictory formula: xerebete den kafa magolotchi. 

For frightening children: tue daye datie' gidio' dimi gurio yatabo. 

Two formulas to remove cactus-spines from the human body : (1) una areya 
rafayete dudrea ebanero abono, caburo copudabo daburi. 

(2) yuni roba rapebo tchaba na aripebo, diida banabo pebo, home 
daba burvo, damei bo bakuna, daodao fuda dada. 

Formula to remove fish-bones or other obstructions from the throat: vidie 
pakidie, maranako tubara tchira deburro, liadara karara. 

Formula for hunting the iguana: Sako den komanari manadi watapuna 
fafa na douere sadii na ditieri. 

When A. L. Pin art gathered these formulas, he found it impossible to 
obtain any interpretation for the single words. When I remarked to him 
that such formulas of sorcery were often made up of unmeaning sounds 
and words, he scouted the idea, and said these sentences were literal quo¬ 
tations from the extinct Aruban tongue. It will be noticed that several 
words in them occur in the lists above : kafa, datie, watapuna (cf. wata- 
pana). In the formula preceding the last one, some rhythm resembling 
assonance is perceptible. 

In making a study of the above lists, I have endeavored to classify the 
lost Aruba language among some of the circumjacent linguistic families. 
But the peculiar selection of the terms, which are very uncommon, the 
paucity and probable disfiguration of them in the mouth of the uneducated 
people have not permitted to find any other hut passing analogies with the 


1881 ] 


303 


[Gatschet. 


above. Goajiro, which is spoken from the point of the Goajira peninsula 
down to the Gulf of Darien in various dialects, yielded the following : 

Aruba: kafa devil , Goaj. yarfas, yaria, yaroja. 

All the other terms which I could compare with Goajiro, Guamaco, 
Arawak, Tupi and the extinct male and female Carib dialects of the 
Leeward islands (dialect of Guadeloupe, Diet, of Rev. Raym. Breton, 
1665) differed entirely from Aruba. Hage, the generic term for ant in the 
insular Carib, may be compared with hanahaua, Formica cephalota of 
Aruban. 

The Paqnamento. 

On account of the peculiar selection and association of their ingredients, 
and the grammatic changes which the terms are undergoing, the jargons 
or medley languages are now being studied by linguists with the interest 
they deserve. The best known jargons of America are the conversational 
Tupi or lengoa geval , the various negro jargons of Guyana, of the AYest 
Indies and of Louisiana, the Chinook jargon, etc. The main ingredient 
of Papiamento, which is spoken upon Aruba, Curasao and the rest of this 
island group, is the Spanish language ; then comes Dutch, the language 
of the Netherlandish rulers, and least in frequency are the words of Indian 
origin. 

The character of this medley speech will best appear from extracts taken 
from a “Conversational Guide/' published at Curasao, 1876. 

Span, comerciante : comcrchanti, cajero cajeru, tenedor de libros tenedo 
di buqui, dependiente clerc, relojero dreshado di oloshi, pastelero trahado di 
pastechi, carnecero matado di bestia, silletero trajado di stul, ojelatero 
blequero, velero seilemaker, aserrador zagdo di palu, encuadernador traja¬ 
do di buqui, sneire (Germ. Schneider), zapatero zapate, albanil mesla, 
herrero smet, remendador lapido, predicador doml, director de entierro for- 
lese, sepulturero coster, comejo del templo kerkerad, pulpito prekstul, comu- 
nion ricibimentu, campanero leidd di cloc. 

The following objects of natural history are partly rendered by aboriginal 
Indian terms : Span, arbol de uva palu di dreif, arbol de mamon palu di 
quenepa, arbol de merey palu di cachu ; arbol de guayaba palu di guyaba, 
pdjaro para, yegua meri, mula muje, burro macliu, hurra buricu muje, 
mono macacu, rata yaca, pulga pruga, lombriz bichi, golondrina souchi, 
hormiga bruminga, cucaracha cacalaca, gavilan guaraguara, polio puitu, 
pavo calacuna, papagayo lora, cienpie disinbei (Dutch), pauji pajuis, 
migajas wiriwiri, cante conufes (a fish), zavalo snuc (a fish), arenque en 
salza pequele (Dutch), chimbobo guiambo, ahullama pampuna, lecJioza 
papaya, aji (or chile ) promente [Span, pimiento], cambur bacoba, guandbana 
sorsaca, pldtano banana, chirimona o rinm scopapel, pintc anaza, naraja 
laraja, ciruelas preimu. 

AYe add a few conversational sentences : 

Debt 3 ser tarde mesle a lat 

No espera Usted al Sr. L. ? bo no ta spera shon L. ? 


Gatschefc.] 


304 


[July 18, 


Ve a ver otra vez si ha venido bai ueita atrove cu el a bini. 

El Sr. L. estd cn casaf Shon L., ta na cas ? 

Ila ido fuera ela vai afo 

Ilablas Men bo ta papia bon 

Lo estimare siempre lo mi stimabu tur mi vida 

Quicre listed jug ar carta f mener quie junga carta? (mencr : mynheer ) 

Mo tengo ganas dejugar mi non tin gustu d6 junga 
Ila comiclo Usted bastante ? bo a come jopi ? 

Es bastante lejos ta macha aleu 

Estoy aun unpoco debit ainda mi ta un poco suae 

Guantas iglesias hai aqui? cuantu misa tin aqui ? 

Muchas cn cl campo jopi na cunucu. 

The above examples plainly show that this jargon exhibits the same 
processes of linguistic deterioration as are commonly found in medley 
languages of this description. 

Three dialects may be distinguished upon Curasao island (Guide, p. 49) : 
that of the Dutch Protestants, marked by the peculiar accent of the Hol¬ 
landers ; the one of the Jews, which comes nearer to the Spanish pronun¬ 
ciation ; the third dialect i3 that of the common people. The ternr papia - 
mento signifies talk , conversation and is derived from palabramentum, pa- 
labra being the Spanish for word, talk (from -apafioXij)- The verb papia 
means to converse , speak. 

At Corsouw a weekly paper of four quarto pages was published from 
1871 to 1875 in this jargon, which bore the title : Civilisado. Courant di 
pueblo. Orden, trabouw, instruccion :—Progreso. 

Judging from the titles below transmitted by the kindness of Mr. Pinart 
the literature of this isolated form of human speech has been up to the 
present time chiefly of a devotional character : 

Guia para los Espanoles hablar papiaraento, y viceversa, para que los 
de Curazao puedan hablar espanol. Por X. N.—Curazao, imprenta del 
Comcrcio, 1876. 16°, 86 pages. (The title on the book-cover differs 

slightly from the inside title above.) 

Jubileo di 1875. (Curazao) 1875. 16 p., 12°. 

Ilistoria corticoenan for di Bybel. 3 ft edicion. Curasao, Impr. del Yica- 
riato, 1876. 24°. 4 a edicion, 1881. 

Bida i sufrimentoe di nos Scnjor Hesu Cristoe. Curasao, Impr. del Corn 0 , 
1876. 59 pp., 16°. 

Canticanan religiosa. 2 a edicion. Curazao, 1879. 24°. 

Ciento cuenta corticoe. Boeke di leza pa uso di school. Curasao, Impr. 
del Yicariato, 1881. 12°. 

Boeki di leza pa uso di skool di dia domingo na Curasao. Curasao, 1881. 
24°. 

Catccbismo i doctrina cristiana pa uso di ICatholieken di Curasao. Curasao, 
Imprenta di Yicariato, 1882. 24°. 


1884.1 


305 


[Gatschet. 


Rekenboek pa muchanan di Curacao. Curazao, 1882. 24°. 

Sagrado coerazou di ITesus 6 meditaciounan pa luna di juni consagrar na 
S. coerazon i no bena na honor di cs coerazon sagrado. N. L. and N. 
J. 200 pp., 323 

A treatise on the Papiamento jargon was published by Emilio Teza in 
the Politecnico of Milan, Yol. xi, and also separately : 11 dialetto curas- 
sese , Pisa, 18G3. 8°. 


APFENDIX. 

(From manuscripts transmitted by Mr. Alpli. L. Pinart.) 

I. Prayer to the Holy Virgin in the Karibisi dialect (Karibisi ton go) of 

Surinam . 

Odi Maria, 

Jeretion Maria polole gen ad e tamoeni romo malmna amoro Ivopo papo- 
rijan Kopo papori walijan Santa Maria tamoeni sanoseroepa toko wango- 
nibo poko erome koman boku alamboe pbmera. Kepobome. 

II. Lord's Prayer in the Cana language , as spoken on the Pacific slope of 
the Isthmus of Panama. Reproduced in a corrected form from the 
American Antiquarian , Yol. v (1883), p. 354. 

Patir nanguini, pechiqui niptalnega iiperekuichi ; 
penukaguine petakeanguine pebiluleguine ; 
pebalelias pepincheerguin, napkine pagaiopi niptalneguin ; 
maatuda nanguin pan epanegun, emigoatguine ; 
peanalchagogue animalguin, pel anniappigua ; 

. peanalchugo pel anayuppigua pelibanguimbi ; 
pel imalistarguin ipeanaalchago, okuja Jesus, 
patir or papa father, nanguini our ; maatuda to-day, pan bread , pe thou, 
igoat give (in emigoatguine), -guine plural suffix. 

III. Prayer to Christ in the Sambii dialect of Choco, Columbian States. 

Naniuri biaunausi zese guanadi, mune-d mule Jesu Cristo zese umaquina 
etaupen zese redentor mune-e, maquiniamur umaquiniamur, zanaambul 
umandu caidebu tand6 caidebu tande caide, zegabur careambur troadena, 
zaum beuatde, latiguai, cauai nambicansi convezainame cumli-i penitencia 
caima mnjorasnane convesai naninanei. 

Pidele perdon a Dios, digas Senor mio Jesu Cristo, Dios yhombre, cria- 
dor padre y redentor mio : pesame de todo corazon de haberte ofendido 
solo por ser quien eses tan digno de ser amado, y tambien me pesa porque 
me puedas castigar en el infierno, y propongo nunca mas pecar ayudado 
de tu divina gracia, confesarme y cumplir la penitencia que me mande el 
padre confesor. 

FROC. AMER. FIIILOS. SOC. XXII. 120. 2m. PRINTED MAY 25, 1885. 


