MV5EVM0FTHEAnElLlCAN  INDIAN." 

iiim""""""" 'i'"'^iilimiiMliiiiiiiiiiiiiili^l{ii'%iJ'"«iyiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiliiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiimliii"i^^^ jmimii 


MARSHALL  H.SAVILLE  COll  Huntington  Free  Library 

Native  American 

Collection 


CORNELL  UNIVERSITY 
LIBRARY 


3   1924   104  074  665 


^^ 


Cornell  University 
Library 


The  original  of  this  book  is  in 
the  Cornell  University  Library. 

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in 
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text. 


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924104074665 


AN  INQUIRY  INTO  THE 

ANIMISM  AND  FOLK-LORE  OF 

THE  GUIANA  INDIANS 


BY 


WALTER  E.  ROTH 

Commissioner  of  the  Pom^roon  District,  British  Guiana;  late  Chief  Protector  of 

Aboriginals,  Queensland;  late  Royal  Commissioner  appointed  to  inquire 

into  the  condition  of  the  natives  of  Western  Australia; 

Corresponding  Member  of  the  Anthropological  Societies  of  Berlin  and  Florence; 

Author  of  "North  Queensland  Ethnography,"  etc. 


EXTRACT   FROM  THE    THIRTIETH  ANNUAL  REPORT 
OF      THE      BUREAU      OF      AMERICAN     ETHNOLOGY 


WASHINGTON 

GOVERNMENT  PRINTING  OPFIOE 

1815 


To 

two  of  my  oldest  friends 

CHARLES  HEDLEY 

Curator  of  the  Australian  Museum,  Sydney 

and 

TOMMASO  TITTONI 

Italian  Ambassador  at  Paris 

I 

dedicate  this  Memoir 


105 


PREFACE 

When,  some  seven  years  ago,  I  took  up  the  duties  of  stipendiary 
magistrate,  medical  officer,  and  protector  of  Indians  in  this  mosquito- 
cursed  district  of  the  Pomeroon,  I  determined  upon  devoting  all  my 
spare  time — and  there  has  been  plenty  of  it — to  an  ethnographical 
survey  of  the  native  tribes  of  British  Gmana,  somewhat  on  the  lines 
I  had  already  followed  in  the  case  of  North  Queensland.  As  the 
work  progressed,  I  recognized  that,  for  the  proper  comprehension  of 
my  subject,  it  was  necessary  to  make  inquiry  concerning  the  Indians 
of  Venezuela,  Surinam,  and  Cayenne,  with  the  result  that  the  area 
to  be  reviewed  comprised  practically  that  portion  of  the  South 
Anaerican  continent  bounded,  roughly  speaking,  by  the  Atlantic 
seaboard,  the  Orinoco,  and  the  northern  limits  of  the  watershed  of 
the  Rio  Negro,  and  the  lower  Amazon;  and  it  was  not  long  before  I 
realized  that  for  the  proper  study  of  the  Arawaks  and  the  Caribs  I  had 
to  include  that  of  the  now  almost  extinct  AntiUeans. 

In  the  course  of  my  ethnographical  work,  I  collected  sufficient 
material  in  the  way  of  myth,  legend,  and  fable  to  warrant  the  publi- 
cation of  a  separate  volvmie  on  Animism  and  Folk-lore,  and  so  the 
following  pages  have  come  to  be  written.  The  legends  collected  have 
been  drawn  mainly  from  Arawak,  Carib,  and  Warrau  sources,  and 

are  initialed  (A),  (C),  and  (W),  respectively. 

Walter  E.  Roth. 

Pomeroon  River,  British  Guiana,  June,  1913. 

107 


CONTENTS 


Page 

Chapter  I.  No  evidence  of  belief  in  a  Supreme  Being 117 

II.  Tribal  heroes 120 

III.  Traces  of  spirit,  idol,  and  fefdsh  cult 137 

IV.  Creation  of  man,  plants,  and  animals 141 

V.  The  body  and  its  associated  spirits 149 

VI.  Dreams;  idiocy 165 

VII.  FamiUaT  spirits 167 

VIII.  The  spirits  of  the  bush:  Natural  history 170 

IX.  The  spirits  of  the  bush:  Animals  as  sentient  human  beings 199 

X.  The  spirits  of  the  bush:  Associated  with  particular  plants 228 

XI.  The  spirits  of  the  mountain 23-5 

XII.  The  spirits  of  the  water 241 

XIII.  The  spirits  of  the  sky 2.54 

XIV.  Omens,  charms,  talismans , . .  271 

XV.  Restrictions  on  game  and  food,  vision,  arts  and  crafts,  nomenclature  292 

XVI.  Sexual  life 308 

XVII.  The  medicine-man 327 

XVIII.  Kanaima;  the  invisible  or  broken  arrow 354 

XIX.  Miscellaneous  Indian  beliefs  concerning  men  and  animals 363 

XX.  Animism  and  folk-tales  of  recent  introduction;  mixed  foreign  and 

indigenous  beliefs 372 

XXI.  Miscellaneous  folk-lore,  independent  of  animism 380 

Glossary 385 


MYTHS  AND  FOLK-TALES 


Eariwali  and  the  wonderful  tree 120 

The  story  of  Haburi 122 

The  adventures  of  Kororomanna 126 

The  sun,  the  frog,  and  the  firesticks  (Varrau) 130 

The  sun,  the  frog,  and  the  firesticks  (Carib) 133 

The  sun,  the  frog,  and  the  firesticks  (Makusi) 135 

The  origin  of  the  Caribs  (Warrau) 143 

The  origin  of  the  Caribs  (Carib) 144 

The  first  fruit  trees  (Arawak) 146 

The  first  fruit  trees  (Carib) 147 

The  man  with  a  bad  temper 150 

The  sorcerer's  daughter 151 

The  idiot  who  wanted  to  fly 166 

The  Maihisikiri  changes  the  woman  into  a  bush  spirit 172 

The  man  who  always  hunted  scrub-turkey 173 

The  shrewd  little  boy  and  the  hebu 174 

The  spirit's  brain  and  the  goat-sucker 175 

109 


110  LIST  OF   MYTHS  AND  FOLK-TALES  [eth.am.30 

Page 

The  mutilated  husband  is  made  whole 177 

How  pain,  misery,  and  death  came  into  the  world -  179 

Why  the  drink  turned  sour 180 

Why  children  become  sick  and  cry 181 

The  woman  killed  by  her  husbamd'sjipirit 182 

The  result  of  stealing  other  people's  property 183 

The  man  changed  into  a  beast 184 

The  man  who  dined  after  dark 184 

How  the  haimara  came  to  have  such  fine  big  eyes 185 

The  wrong  rattle,  the  bush-hog,  and  the  baby 186 

The  killing  of  the  bush  spirit  and  his  wife 188 

The  woman  kills  the  hebu 1»9 

The  bush  spirit  and  the  pregnant  woman 1M9 

The  contented  and  happy  son-in-law 190 

The  bush  spirit  tricked  while  himting  frogs 191 

Maw4ri  and  tobacco  smoke ^ 192 

The  bush  spirit  with  big  ideas 193 

The  woman  who  mimicked  the  bush  spirit 194 

The  danger  of  associating  with  spirits 195 

The  rain-frog  wife 198 

The  honey-bee  son-in-law 199 

The  man  who  was  changed  into  a  powis 201 

The  stolen  child 202 

The  tiger  changed  into  a  woman 203 

The  woman  in  love  with  a  sloth 204 

Why  honey  is  so  scarce  now 204 

The  man  who  claimed  the  tiger's  meal 205 

The  woman  who  battled  with  two  tigers 205 

The  man  with  a  vulture  wife 206 

The  man  with  a  baboon  wife 209 

The  disobedient  son  killed  by  a  tiger 210 

Don't  count  your  chickens  before  they  are  hatched 211 

The  biter  bit 211 

How  alligator  came  to  have  his  present  shape ^ 212 

How  the  birds  obtained  their  distinctive  markings 212 

The  deer  and  the  turtle ' 212 

Black  tiger,  wau-uta,  and  the  broken  arrow ^ 213 

The  story  of  Adaba 215 

Why  the  Indians  killed  Black  Tiger 215 

Bravery  rewarded  with  a  wife : 216 

Why  Black  Tiger  killed  the  Indians 217 

Bdrmu  [Bahmoo]  and  the  frog 218 

How  the  man  fooled  the  tiger 218 

The  search  for  the  stone  ax 220 

The  Huri  Fish  Nation 220 

How  the  ant-eater  fooled  the  man 220 

How  the  Indians  learned  to  paddle 221 

The  big  bats '. 221 

The  magic  boat 222 

The  Amazons 222 

The  country  of  the  stone  adzes 223 

How  txu-tle  fooled  the  Yawarri 223 

How  the  turtle  tricked  the  tiger 223 

Tiger  and  ant-eater 225 


BOTH]  LIST  OF   MYTHS  AND  FOLK-TAUES  IH 


How  birds  got  their  present  plumage 225 

Hunting  is  no  part  of  woman's  work 226 

How  the  tapir  punished  the  Indian 226 

The  turtle  and  the  aruressobird 226 

Sisters  bush-cow  (tapir)  and  water-cow  (manati) 227 

The  first  "makuari"  whips 1 228 

The  spirit  of  the  rot  saves  the  young  woman 231 

The  ite  pahn  and  the  mora  tree 232 

The  piai  in  the  water  spirit's  belly 244 

Sisters  porjwiseand  sea-cow 245 

The  fisherman's  water-jug  and  potato 245 

How  the  water  spirit  got  the  man's  wife  from  him 247 

How  the  water  woman  secured  a  landsman  for  husband 248 

The  moon-sick  girl  and  the  water  spirit  (Carib) 248 

The  moon-sick  girl  and  the  water  spirit  (Warrau) 249 

How  sickness  and  death  came  into  the  world 250 

Amanna  and  her  talkative  husband 251 

The  story  of  Oko6-hi 255 

How  the  moon  got  his  dirty  face 256 

The  legend  of  Bat  Mountain 259 

Thebabracote  and  camudi 261 

The  legend  of  the  Seven  Stars 262 

The  story  of  Nohi-abassi 263 

The  legend  of  Serikoai 265 

The  Woman  of  the  Dawn 266 

The  obstinate  girl  who  refused  the  old  man 272 

How  the  little  boy  escaped  from  the  Caribs 273 

The  night-owl  and  his  bat  brothers-in-law 276 

The  candle-fly  saved  the  lost  hunter 277 

The  wife  teaches  her  husband  to  hunt 279 

The  bina,  the  resurrected  father,  and  the  bad  girl 286 

The  baboon  cough 292 

"Shut  your  eyes  and  wish" 301 

The  lucky  pot 302 

Honey-bee  and  the  sweet  drinks 305 

A  warning  to  wives 316 

The  broken  egg 323 

The  little  bush  child.-. 326 

The  hummingbird  with  tobacco  for  the  first  piai 334 

Komatari,  the  first  medicine-man 336 

Saved  by  a  dream 342 

The  medicine-man  and  the  carrion  crows 343 

The  story  of  Koaeso  (BrerKabbit) 372 

The  woman  and  the  serpent  OroU 378 

The  piai  and  the  Earthquake  People 378 

How  the  lazy  man  was  cured 380 

Always  be  content 380 

The  old  woman  who  died  of  shame 381 

The  man  who  interfered  with  his  brother's  wife 381 

The  old  bUnd  man  who  wanted  a  woman 382 

How  we  beat  the  Caribs 383 


ILLUSTRATIONS 


Page 

Plate  4.  The  Kaieteur  Fall 237 

5.  Aiawak  doctors'  benches. 330 

6.  A  Carib  piai's  "consulting  room, "  Monica  River 334 

7.  A  touvinga,  or  two-fingered  negro 364 

Figure  1.  Carib  string  puzzle,  designed  to  deceive  the  Bush  Spirits 180 

2.-  Carib  drinking-cup,  Pomeroon  River 283 

3.  Caiib  goblet,  Pomeroon  River 289 

■  4.  Arawak  piai's  rattle,  Pomeroon  River 330 

•  5.  Doll,  or  manikin,  of  Arawak  piai,  Moruca  River 332 

6.  Chest-ornament  of  Arawak  piai,  Moruca  River 333 

112 


WOEKS  OF  REFERENCE 

(Note. — ^The  following  list  of  publications  is  not  presented  as  a  complete  bibliog- 
raphy, but  as  indicating  those  authors  to  whom,  directly  or  indirectly,  I  find  myself 
indebted.  The  titles  of  works  from  which  excerpts  have  been  taken  are  initialed. 
As  most  of  these  publications  are  in  foreign  languages,  the  excerpts,  here  given  in 
English,  are  necessarily  translations,  many  of  them  being  paraphrased  to  some  extent 
in  order  that  they  may  be  best  adjusted  with  the  context. 

Throughout  the  memoir  authorities  are  cited  by  the  initials  used  below,  respectively; 
in  connection  with  these,  roman  numerals  indicate  the  volume  numbers  and  arable 
figures  the  page  numbers. — ^W.  E.  B.) 

Ac  AcuNA,  Chbistofheb.    Relation  of  the  great  River  of  Amazons  in  South 

America.    London,  1698. 
A  Alexander,  J.  E.    Transatlantic  sketches.    2  vols.    London,  1833. 

Appun,  C.  F.    Unter  den  Tropen.    Jena,  1871. 
Ba  Bancroft,  Edwabd.    Anessay  on  the  natural  history  of  Guiana.    London, 

1769.        *" 
PBa       V  Barrerb,  Pierre.    Nouvelle  relation  de  la  France  ^quinoxiale.    Paris, 

1743. 
HWB         Bates,  Henry  Walter.    The  naturalist  on  the  Amazon.     London,  1892. 
Bechamel.    See  Grillet. 
Bellin   [Jacques  Nicolas].    Description  g^ographique  de  la  Guyane. 

Paris,  1763. 
Benoit,  p.  J.    Voyage  k  Surinam.     Bruxelles,  1839. 
Be         V  Bernau,  J.  H.    Missionary  labours  in  British  Guiana.     London,  1847. 

]/  BiET,  A.    Voyage  de  la  France  ^quinoxiale  en  I'lsle  de  Cayenne,  en 
I'ann^e  1652.    Paris,  1664. 
BW  Boddam-Whetham,  J.  W.     Roraima  and  British  Guiana.    London,  1879. 

Bol  BoLiNGBHOKE,  Henhy.    A  voyago  to  the  Demerary.    Norwich,  1807. 

BBR      V  Borde,  Fr.  de  la.    History  of  the  origin,  customs,  religion,  wars,  and 
travels  of  the  Caribs.     Timehri,  v,  pt.  2,  Demerara,  1886.    Translated 
from  the  French,  and  condensed,  by  G.  J.  A.  Boech-Reitz. 
Bosch-Reitz.    See  Borde. 
Br         -^    Brett,  W.  H.    The  Indian  tribes  of  Guiana.    London,  1868. 

BrA  Mission  work  among  the  Indian  tribes,  etc.     London  (n.  d.). 

BrB  Legends  and  myths.    London  (n.  d.). 

Bri       ^   Brinton,  Daniel  G.    The  American  race.    New  York,  1891. 
Bro  Brown,  C.  B.    Canoe  and  camp  Ufe  in  British  Guiana.    2d  ed.,  London, 

1877. 

and  Lidstonb,  W.    Fifteen  thousand  miles  on  the  Amazon,  etc. 

London,  1878. 
LaC  Casas,  Bartolomb  de  las.    An  account  of  the  first  voyages  and  dis- 

coveries made  by  the  Spaniards  in  America.     London,  1699. 

Castelnau,    Francis   de.    Expedition   dans   les   parties   centrales   de 

TAm^rique  du  Sud.    4  vols.    Paris,  1850-57. 
CC  Oatalooue  of  contributions  transmitted  from  British  Guiana  to  the 

London  International  Exhibition,  1862.    Georgetown,  1862. 
GC  Catlin,  Gbokgb.    Life  among  the  Indians.    London  (n.  d.). 

15961° — 30ETH — 15 8  113 


114  WORKS   OP   EEFEEENOB  [eth.  ann.30 

DAC     V'  Chanca,  Diego  Alvarez:  The  letter  of,  dated  1494,  relating  to  tke  second 

voyage  of  Columbus  to  America,  by  A.  M.  Fernandez  de  Ybarra. 

Smithsonian  Misc.  Coll.,  No.  1698,  pp.  428^57,  1907.  _ 
Cou       V/  CoiJDREAU,  H.  A.    La  France  equinoxiale.    2  vols.     Paris,  1887. 
Cr         V    Crevaux,  J.    Voyages  dans  I'Am^rique  du  Sud.    Paris,  1883. 

Dalton,  Henry  G.    The  history  of  British  Guiana.    2  vols.    London, 

1«55. 
Da  Dance,  Chas.  Daniel.    Chapters  from  a  Guianese  log-book.    Demerara, 

1881. 

V  [Davies].    The    History  of    the    Caribby    Islands  .  .  .  1666.     [For  tlje 

original  work  see  Rochefort.] 
FD      \/   Depons,  F.    Travels  in  parts  of  South  America,  during  the  years  1801, 

1802,    1803,    1804.     London,    1806.     (In   Phillips,    Coll.    of   Modem 

Voyages,  vol.  iv,  London,  1806.) 
Dixon,  Geo.  G.     Four  months  of  travel  in  British  Guiana.    Geographical 

Journal,  April,  1895. 
Drake.     Sir  Francis  Drake  Revised:  etc.     1626. 
Df  Duff,  Robt.     British  Guiana.     Glasgow,  1866. 

PE  Ehrenreich,  Paul.     Die  Mythen  und  Legenden  der  stidamerikanischen 

Urvolker.    Berlin,  1905. 
Fe  Fermin,    Philippe.    Description  g6n6rale,   historique,   g6ographique   et 

physique  de  la  Colonie  de  Surinam.    2  vols.    Amsterdam,  1769. 
WF      V    Fewkes,  J.  Walter.    An  Antillean  statuette,  with  notes  on  West  Indian 

rehgious  beliefs.    Amer.  Anthr.,  n.  s.,  xi,  pp.  348-358,  1909. 
GF  Feiederici,  Georg.    Scalping  in  America.    Smithsonian  Rep.  for  1906 

pp.  423-438,  1907. 
Galard-Tbrraube.    Neue  Reise  nach  Cayenne.    Leipzig,  1799. 
GiLi,  F.  S.     Saggio  di  storia  Americana. 
Go         \/de  Goejb,  C.  H.    Beitrage  zur  Volkerkunde  von  Surinam.     Int.  Archiv 

fiir  Ethnographic,  Bd.  xix.  Heft  i-ii,  pp.  1-34,  Leiden,  1908. 
GB  Grillbt,  John,  and  Bechamel,  Francis.    A  journal  of  the  travels  of 

into  Guiana.     London,  1698. 

G  Gtjmilla,    Joseph.    Historia   natural  ....  del   Rio    Orinoco.    2   vols. 

Barcelona,  1791. 
Harcourt,  Robert.    A  relation  of  a  voyage  to  Guiana.     London,  1613. 
HA  Hartsinck,  J.  J.    Beschryving  van  Guiana  of  de  wilde  Kust  in  Zuid- 

America Amsterdam,  1770. 

^  Herrera,  Antonio  DE.     Historia  general  de  los  Hechos  de  los  Castellanos 

en  las  islas,  etc.    Second  edition.     Madrid,  1730. 
HiA  HrLHOusE,  William.    Journal  of  a  voyage  up  the  Massaroony  in  1831. 

Jour.  Roy.  Geog.  Soc,  iv,  pp.  25-40,  1834. 

HiB  The  Warow  land  of  British  Guiana.     Ibid.,  pp.  321-333. 

HiO  Notices  of  the  Indians  settled  in  the  interior  of  British  Guiana. 

Ibid.,  II,  pp.  227-249,  1832. 
AVH   ^  Humboldt,  Alexander  von.     Personal  narrative  of  travels  to  the  equi- 
noctial regions  of  America.    3  vols.     London,  1852-53. 
IT       ^    iM  Thurn,  Everard  F.    Among  the  Indians  of  Guiana.     London,  1883. 
WI       y^    Irving,  Washington.    Companions  of  Columbus.     London,  1884. 
Je  Jenman,  G.  S.    To  Kaieteur  [in  1881].     Georgetown,  1907. 

WJ  ' —      JoEST,  W.    Ethnographisches  und  Verwandtes  aus  Guayana.    Leiden, 
I  1893. 

V  JtTAN  T  Santacilia,  Jorge,  and  Ulloa,  Antonio  de.    A  voyage  to  South 

America.    2  vols.    London,  1760. 


BOTH)  WORKS  OF  BEFEBENCE  115 

AK  Eaffler,  a.     Sechs  Jahre  in  Surinam.     Stuttgart,  1854. 

•  Keye,  0.    Kurtzer  Entwur  von  Neu-Niederland  und  Guajana.    Leipzig, 
1672. 
Ki  EiBKE,  Henbt.    Twenty-five  years  in  British  Guiana.    London,  1898. 

KG  KocH-GRiJNBEKG,  Theodoh.    Zwei  Jahre  iinter  den  Indianem.    Reisen 

in  Nordwest  Brasilien,  1903-5.    2  vols.    Berlin,  1910. 
KuNiKE,  Htjgo.     Das  Sogenannte"Maiinerldndbett."    ZeiUchriftfur  Eth- 
nologic, Heft  iii-iv,  pp.  546-563,  1911. 
Labat,  J.  B.    Nouveau  voyage  aux  isles  de  TAm^rique.    6  vols.    Paris, 
1722. 

V      Voyage  du  Chevalier  des  Marchais  en  Guin^e,  Isles  Voisines,  et  4 

Cayenne,  en  1725-27.    Amsterdam,  1731. 
"      La  CoNDAMiNE,  Charles  Marie  DE.    Relation  abr^^e  d'un  voyage  fait 
dans  I'interieur  de  I'Am^rique  m^ridionale.    Maestricht,  1778. 
Lapitau.    Moeurs  des  sauvages  am^riquains.    2  vols.     Paris,  1724. 
Las  Casas.    See  Casas. 
LiDSTONE.    See  Brown. 
Martius.    See  Spix. 
Nor  NoRDENSKioLD,  Erland.     Indianerleben.    El  Gian  Chaco  (Sudamerika). 

Leipzig,  1912. 
Patbrson,  J.  D.    British  Guiana  local  guide  1843  [from  notes  of]. 
Penard,  F.  p.  and  A.  P.    De  Menschetende  Aanbidders  der  Zonneslang. 

Paramaribo,  1907. 
NiEUHOPF,  J.    Voyages  and  travels  into  Brasil.     1707. 
Pnk  PiNCKAED,  George.     Notes  on  the  West  Indians.    2  vols.    London,  1816. 

LAP  PiTOU,  L.  A.    Voyage  il  Cayenne'.    2  vols.     Paris,  1807. 

^    Pbbuss,  K.  Th.     Die  Opferblutschale  der  alten  Mexikaner  erlautert  nach 

den  Angaben  der  Cora-Indianer.    Zeitschrift  fur  Ethnohgie,  xuu,  pp. 

293-306,  1911. 

QuANDT,    C.     Nachricht   von   Suriname   und  eeinen   Einwohnera,   etc. 

GorUtz,  1807. 

RoP     V     RocHEFORT,  C.  DE,  and  PoiNCY,  L.  DE.    Histoire  naturelle  et  morale  des 

ilea  Antilles  de  I'Am^rique.  Rotterdam,  1665. 
AR  V^  RojAS,  Aristides.  Obras  escogidas.  Paris,  1907. 
StO  St.  Clair,  T.  Staunton.    A  residence  in  the  West  Indies  and  America. 

2  vols.     London,  1834. 
ScO  ScHOMBURGK,  0.  A.     Reiseu  in  Guiana  und  am  Orinoko.    Leipzig,  1841. 

ScR    '        ScHOMBURQK,  RiCHARD.     Reisen  in  Britisch  Guiana.    2  vols.    Leipzig, 

1847-48. 
ScA  ScHOMBURGK,  ROBERT  HERMANN.     Diary  of  an  ascent  of  the  river  Ber- 

bice.     Jour.  Roy.  Geog.  Soc,  vii,  pp.  302-350,  1837. 

gcB  Expedition  to  the  lower  parts  of  the  Barima  and  Guiania  rivers. 

Ibid.,  XII,  pp.  169-178,  1842. 

gcBc  Excursion  up  the  Barima  and  Cuyuni  rivers.     Ibid.,  pp.  178-1S6. 

ScC  Diary  of  an  ascent  of  the  River  Corentyn.    Ibid.,  vn,  pp.  285- 

301,  1837. 

ScD  A  description  of  British  Guiana.     London,  1840. 

ScE  Journey  to  the  sources  of  the  Essequibo,  etc.     Jour.  Roy.  Geog. 

Soc,  X,  pp"  159-190,  1841. 

ScF  Journey  from  Fort  San  Joaquim  to  Roraima.     Ibid.,  pp.  191-247. 

gcG  Report  of  an  expedition  into  the  interior  of  British  Guayana. 

Ibid.,  VI,  pp.  224-284,  1836. 

gcH  Journey  from  Esmeralda  to  San  Carlos.    Ibid.,  x,  pp.  248-267, 

1841. 


116  WOEKS   OF   EEFEKENCB  [eth.  ann.SO 

SCT  ScHOMBTjRGK,  RoBERT  Hekmann.    Visit  to  the  sources  of  the  Takutu. 

Ibid.,  xm,  pp.  18-75.    London,  1843. 

On  the  religious  traditions  of  the  Macusi  Indians  who  inhabit  the 

upper  Mahu  and  a  portion  of  the  Mocataima  Mountains.    Read  before 
the  Society  of  Antiquaries  Nov.  17th,  1836.    [Thus  far  I  have  been 
unable  to  trace  the  publication  of  this  address. — ^W.  E.  R.] 
AS      ^    SiMSON,  Alfred.    Travels  in  the  wilds  of  Ecuador.    London,  1886. 
SM       V   Spix  and  Martixts.    Reise  in  BrasUien.    3  vols.    Munich,  1823-31. 
St  Stedman,  J.  G.    Narrative  of  a  five  years'  expedition  against  the  revolted 

negroes  of  Surinam.     2  vols.    London,  1806. 
YDS  Von  den  Steinen.    Durch  Zentralbrasilien.    Leipzig,  1886. 

y  Unter  dem  naturvolkern  Zentralbiasiliens.    Berlin,  1893. 

.      Du  Tehtre,  Jean  Baptists.    Histoire  g6n6rale  des  Antilles  habitues  par 

les  Frangais.    4  vols.    Paris,  1667-71. 
Ti  TmEHRi.    Journal  of  the  Royal  Agricultural  and  Commercial  Society  of 

British  Guiana.    See  various  volumes  cited, 
v/   UuoA.    See  Jtjan  y  Santacilia. 
ARW         Wallace,  A.  R.    A  narrative  of  travels  on  the  Amazon  and  Rio  Negro. 

London,  New  York,  and  Melbourne,  1889. 
W         v    Waterton,  Chas.    Wanderings  in  South  America.     London,  1891. 

Ax  WiCKHAM,  H.  A.    Rough  note  of  a  journey  from  Trinidad  to  Para  via  the 

Orinoco  and  Rio  Negro.     London,  1872. 
\/     Ybarra,  Fernandez  de.    See  Chanca. 


AN  INQUIRY  INTO  THE  ANIMISM  AND  FOLK-LOKE  OF 
THE  GUIANA  INDIANS 


By  Walter  E.  Roth 


Chapter  I 
NO  EVIDENCE  OF  BELIEF  IN  A  SUPREME  BEING 

Originally,  Indians  had  no  terms  expressive  of  the  conception  of  a  Supreme  Being; 
such  terms  as  they  now  possess  have  heen  framed  to  suit  civilized,  especially  mis- 
sionary, requirements  (i).'  On  the  other  hand,  traditions  of  certain  Tribal  Heroes 
have  been  unconsciously  assumed  as  indicative  of  the  existence  among  the  natives  of 
the  knowledge  of  a  God  {^). 

1.  Careful  investigation  forces  one  to  the  conclusion  that,  on  the 
evidence,  the  native  tribes  of  Guiana  had  no  idea  of  a  Supreme  Being 
in  the  modern  conception  of  the  term.  This  contention  is  confirmed 
in  a  way  by  Gumilla  (n,  7),"  one  of  the  early  missionary  fathers  on 
the  Orinoco,  who  writes  as  follows: 

In  three  nations  which  will  be  mentioned  directly  they  have  a  word  indicative, 
after  their  fashion,  of  God:  we  trust  that  time  and  labor  will  also  reveal,  in  other  tribes, 
a  name  which  until  now  they  have  furnished  no  sign  of  recognizing  either  by  word  or 
expression.  Even  in  the  said  nations  no  outward  ceremony  of  divine  worship  or 
adoration  has  been  observed.  Nor  are  the  terms  which  express  God  in  the  different 
languages  so  particularized  and  indubitable  as  to  convince  us  of  their  sure  and  certain 
signification.  The  Caribs  call  God  Quiyumoc6n,  i.  e.,  Our  Big  Father,  but  it  is  not 
sufficiently  clear  whether  they  mean  by  this  expression  the  First  Cause  or  the  most 
ancient  of  their  ancestors.  The  Salivas  say  that  Pliru  made  all  that  is  good;  that  he 
lives  in  the  expanse  of  the  sky  .  .  .  The  Betoyes,  before  their  conversion,  used  to 
say  that  the  Sun  was  God,  and  in  their  language,  they  speak  of  both  God  and  Sun 
as  Theos. 

The  nations  of  the  upper  Orinoco,  the  Atabapo,  and  the  Imrida,  as 
Humboldt  records,  have  no  worship  other  than  that  of  the  powers 
of  Nature:  they  call  the  good  principle  Cachimana;  it  is  the  Manito, 
the  Great  Spirit,  that  regulates  the  seasons  and  favors  the  harvests 
(AVH,  n,  362).  In  Cayenne  there  is  the  similar  evidence  of  the 
Jesuits  Grillet  and  Bechamel  (25) :  "The  Xouragues  and  the  Acoquas, 
in  Matters  of  ReUgion,  are  the  same  with  the  Galibis.  They  acknowl- 
edge there  is  a  God,  but  do  not  worship  him.  They  say  he  dwells 
in  Heaven,  without  knowing  whether  he  is  a  Spirit  or  no,  but  rather 
seem  to  believe  he  has  a  body  .  .  .  The  Xouragues  and  the  Acoquas 
call  him  Maire,  and  never  talk  of  him  but  in  fabulous  stories."     They 


J  This  and  similar  reference  numbers  correspond  to  section  numbers,  which  appear  in  bold-fece  type. 
1  See  Note  under  Works  op  Eejerence  (p.  113)  as  to  the  system  employed  in  this  memoir  in  the 
citation  of  authorities.  ,^- 


118  ANIMISM   AND   FOLK-LOBB   OF   GTJIANA   INDIANS    [eth.  ann.  30 

have  not  even  in  their  language  any  suitable  term  to  express  the 
Divinity,  still  less  the  homage  and  respect  due  to  him  (PBa,  218). 
The  present-day  British  Guiana  Carib  name  for  God  is  identical  with 
that  just  given,  Tamosi-Kabutana,  Old  Man-Sky  [Kabu  =  the  Sun], 
figuratively  The  Ancient  of  Heaven,,  or  simply  Tamosi,  without  par- 
ticularizing. But  this  word  is  undoubtedly  the  same  as  tamuchi,  the 
Cayenne  Carib  term  for  the  head-man  or  chief  of  a  tribe;  it  serves 
also  to  designate  a  grandfather  (PBa,  218).  The  same  remark 
perhaps  may  be  apphcable  to  theos,  the  word  given  by  Gumilla  as 
the  Betoya  word  for  the  Divine  Person,  recognizable  in  the  terms 
tuchao  (Cr,  372)  and  tushaua  (HWB,  241,  244),  the  name  given  to  the 
chief,  head-man,  of  the  tribe  or  nation,  in  the  upper  and  lower 
Amazons,  respectively.  Koch-Grunbeig  (ii,  82)  talks  of  Tuschaua 
as  being  Lingoa  Geral.  Wallace  (348),  too,  says  that  the  Indians  of 
the  Amazon  appear  to  have  no  definite  idea  of  a  God.  The  Arawak 
terms  for  the  Christian  deity  also  show  signs  that  they  have  been 
adapted  to  express  a  conception  to  which  they  could  have  been  intro- 
duced only  within  modern  times,  a  statement  which  is  made  advisedly, 
because  ia  none  of  the  Arawak  myths  and  legends  relative  to  the  Crea- 
tion, even  in  those  pubUshed  by  clerics,  is  there  a  single  reference  to 
the  All-Maker  (Br,  58)  under  the  term  of  Wa'chinachi,  Our  Father, 
Wa'murretakuon(na)chi,  Our  Maker,  or  even  Aiomun  Kondi,  Dweller 
on  High.  It  is  very  noteworthy  that  the  same  discrepancy  as  to  the 
alleged  word  for  God  is  at  once  apparent  in  almost  all  the  Creation 
myths  of  the  other  tribes  that  so  far  I  have  managed  to  unearth:  for 
example,  the  Warrau  word  (ScR,  ii,  515)  Jcwarisabarote,  really  intended 
for  Tcwaresa  la-arautu,  meaniug  literally  '  on-top  belonging-to.'  The 
only  exceptioh  perhaps  would  seem  to  be  the  Warrau  Kanonatu,  Our 
Maker  (IT,  366),  referred  to  by  Brett  in  his  Warrau  story  of  the  origin 
of  the  Caribs  (BrB,  62),  where  its  introduction  is  certainly  suspicious. 
"Some  [of  the  Orinoco]  tribes,  Father  Caulin  tells  us,  considered  the 
Sun  as  the  Supreme  Being  and  First  Cause;  it  was  to  bim  that  they 
attributed  the  productions  of  the  earth,  scanty  or  copious  rains,  and 
all  other  temporal  blessings;  others,  on  the  contrary,  believed  that 
everything  depended  on  the  influence  of  the  moon,  and  conceived, 
when  she  suffered  an  eclipse,  that  she  was  angry  with  them.' '  (FD,  51 .) 
It  is  known  that  the  Chaimas,  Cumanagotos,  Tamanacs,  and  other 
original  tribes  of  the  Carib  people,  worshipped  (adoraban)  the  Sun 
and  Moon  (AR,  185).  For  perhaps  the  most  extraordinary  con- 
ception met  with,  however,  concerning  ideas  of  a  Supreme  Being,  I 
would  quote  the  reply  given  to  Acuna  (97)  by  a  cacique  of  one  of  the 
Amazon  tribes:  "He  told  me  himself  was  God,  and  begotten  by  the 
Sun,  affirming  that  his  Soul  went  every  night  into  Heaven  to  give 
orders  for  the  succeeding  Day,  and  to  regvdate  the  Government  of  the 
Universe!"  The  Tupi  language,  at  least,  as  taught  by  the  old 
Jesuits,  has  a  word,  tupdna,  signifying  God  (HWB,  259).     And  so 


BOTH]  NO   EVIDENCE    OF   BELIEF   IN   A   SUPREME   BEING  119 

it  happened  that  the  Httle  china  dolls  which  Koch-Grunberg  (i,  184) 
presented  to  the  women  and  children  on  the  Aiary  River  (Rio  Xegro) 
were  generally  called  tupdna:  the  people  took  them  for  %ures  of  saints 
from  missionary  times. 

2.  Conversely,  it  is  interesting  to  note  how  both  travelers  and 
missionaries  have  assumed  almost  unconsciously  the  Indian  tradi- 
tions of  certain  mythic  Heroes  to  be  more  or  less  indicative  of  the 
view  no  doubt  a  priori  conscientiously  held  by  the  former  that  the 
native  was  not  without  the  knowledge  of  a  God.  Thus,  HUhouse 
(HiC,  244)  writing  in  1832,  makes  the  statement,  blindly  followed, 
strangely  enough,  by  Schomburgk  (ScR,  ii,  319)  in  1848,  that  "The 
Indians  acknowledge  the  existence  of  a  superior  divinity,  the  imiversal 
creator;  and  most  tribes,  also,  beheve  in  a  subservient  power,  whose 
particular  province  is  the  protection  of  their  nation.  Amongst  the 
Arawaaks,  Aluberi  is  the  supreme  being,  and  Kimu-umanny  the  god  or 
patron  {Schutz  gott)  of  the  Arawaak  nation,  "etc.  With  regard  to  the 
former  there  is  a  very  probable  reference  to  him  imder  the  name  of 
Hubuiri,  some  three  centuries  previously,  in  the  Archivos  de  Indias: 
Patronato  (quoted  by  Rodway  in  Timehri  for  1895,  p.  9),  where,  in  an 
account  of  the  Provinces  and  Nations  of  the  Aruacas  [Arawaks]  by 
Rodrigo  de  Navarrete,  the  latter  says :  ' '  From  those  whom  I  have  fre- 
quently kept  in  my  house,  I  have  understood  that  their  behef  and  object 
of  adoration  is  the  firmament  or  heavens,  because  they  say  that  in  the 
greater  heaven  there  is  a  powerful  lord  and  a  great  lady  .  .  .  when 
they  die,  their  souls  will  go  with  Hubuiri,  as  they  call  the  great  and 
powerful  lord  in  heaven. "  This  same  Alubiri,  or  Hubuiri,  is  stUl  rec- 
ognizable as  Habmi  (Sect.  9)  in  the  stories  related  by  me,  and  as 
Abore,  the  Warrau  "Father  of  Inventions"  in  the  legend  told  by 
Brett  (BrB,76).  In  his  Arawak  vocabulary  the  name  for  God  is  given 
by  Schomburgk  (ScR,ii,515)  asKTU-urumanni:  Brett  (Br, 58),  however, 
is  more  correct  in  saying  that  it  is  the  Warraus  who  "sometimes 
use  the  word  'Korroromana'  when  speaking  of  God;  but  it  is  doubtful 
what  ideas  some  of  them  attach  to  that  name. "  As  a  matter  of  fact, 
both  of  these  would-be  deities,  Alubiri  (Sect.  3)  and  Kororomanna 
(Sect.  19),  were  Arawak  and  Warrau  Tribal  Heroes,  respectively. 
Similar  remarks  may  be  made  of  Makimaima  and  Pia  (Sects.  29-41), 
and  of  Amahvaca  (Sect.  4^).  The  name  Amahvaca  is  spread  over 
a  region  of  more  than  five  thousand  square  leagues. 

He  is  found  designated  as  "the  father  of  mankind,"  or  "our  great  grandfather,  "aa  far 
as  to  the  Carribhee  nations.  .  .  .  Amalivaca  is  not  originally  the  Great  Spirit,  the 
Aged  of  Heaven,  the  invisible  being,  whose  worship  springs  from  that  of  the  powers  of 
nature,  when  nations  rise  insensibly  to  the  consciousness  of  the  unity  of  these  powers; 
he  is  rather  a  personage  of  the  heroic  times,  a  man,  who,  coming  from  afar,  lived  in  the 
land  of  the  Tamanacs  and  the  Caribs,  sculptured  symbolic  figures  upon  the  rocks, 
and  disappeared  by  going  back  to  the  country  he  had  previously  inhabited  beyond  the 
ocean.    [AVH,  ii,  474.] 


CHAPTER  II 
TRIBAL  HEROES 

Alubiri  or  Hubuiri;  Hariwali  and  the  Wonderful  Tree  (SS);  The  Story  of  Habiiri 
(9-18).  Koioromanna:  his  Adventures  {19-28).  Makunaima  and  Pia;  or,  the  Sun,  the 
Prog,  and  the  Firesticks — Warrau  version  {29-S4),  Carib  version  (S5-^8),  Makusi 
version  (S9-41).    Amalivaca  (42). 

3.  Some  of  the  mythic  Heroes  have  a  history  peculiarly  their 
own,  of  which  it  is  now  proposed  to  give  a  few  particulars. 

I  will  begin  with  Alubiri,  or  Hubuiri,  for  whom  Hilhouse,  as 
already  stated  (Sect.  £),  found  a  place  in  the  Arawak  cosmogony, 
a  view  which  Schomburgk  indorsed,  with  a  reference  to  him,  however, 
as  one  "who  does  not  trouble  himseM  about  men."  In  Brett's  time, 
however,  and  at  the  present  day,  throughout  the  Pomeroon  district, 
the  Hero  seemingly  appears  only  under  the  name  Haburi.  The 
Pomeroon  Warrau  now  claim  Haburi  as  their  particular  Hero,  in  just 
the  same  way  as  Brett  (BrB,76)  did  for  them  under  the  name  Abore. 
For  my  own  part  I  suspect  that  the  term  Alubiri  is  but  another 
form  of  the  name  Oruperi,  the  mythical  Carib  snake  (Sect.  ^85), 
which  gave  rise  to  all  the  hunting  hinas,  and  that  Haburi  has  some 
philological  connection  with  Yaperi-KuU,  the  Hero  (Sect.  4^)  of 
the  Siusi  branch  of  the  Arawak  stock.  It  is  only  for  the  reason 
that  an  old  Arawak  friend  identified  Hariwah  (cf.  Arawanili,  Sect. 
185)  with  Haburi — an  identity  which  I  admittedly  can  neither 
confirm  nor  challenge — that  I  propose  beginning  with  these  mythic 
Heroes  by  introducing  the  story  of — 

Hariwali  and  the  WoNDERFtrL  Tree  (A) 

Hariwali  was  a  clever,  painstaking  piai,  who  spent  most  of  his  time  in  clearing  the 
■field  for  his  two  wives.  These  two  women,  their  children,  and  his  brother  lived 
with  him  at  his  house.  While  felling  the  timber,  the  wives  undertook,  turn  and  turn 
about,  to  bring  their  husband  some  cassiri  daily.  It  happened  now  that  while 
carrying  the  usual  refreshment  one  of  the  wives  was  met  by  the  brother-in-law,  who 
was  bringing  in  some  itiriti  strands  to  weave  baskets  with .  ' '  Hullo ! "  he  said, ' '  where 
are  you  going?"  to  which  he  received  reply,  "I  am  taking  cassiri  to  my  husband  in 
the  field. — But  I  like  you.  Do  you  like  me?"  "No,  I  don't,"  he  answered,  "and 
even  if  I  did,  my  brother,  being  a  medicine-man,  would  find  it  out  very  soon." 
She  tried  him  again,  and  tempted  him  sorely,  and  then  she  threw  her  arms  round  him. 
He  was  but  mortal.  .  .  .  She  assured  him  that  her  husband  would  never  find  out 
what  had  happened,  and  both  went  their  respective  ways.  Before  she  reached  the 
field,  however,  she  broke  the  calabash;  then  with  a  pointed  stick  she  cut  her  knee, 
causing  it  to  bleed.  When  Hariwali  saw  her  coming  slowly  along  with  a  limp 
carrying  the  broken  calabash,  he  asked  her  what  had  happened.  AU  she  could  do 
was  to  point  to  the  scratch  and  blood  on  her  lame  knee,  and  tell  him  that  she  had 
120 


BOTH]  HEBOES  121 

had  an  accident,  having  fallen  on  a  stump.  He  was  a  shrewd  piai,  however,  and 
knew  exactly. what  had  happened,  and  though  he  said  nothing  then,  he  determined 
not  only  upon  getting  rid  of  her,  but  of  his  other  wife  also;  he  just  then,  however, 
directed  her  to  return  home. 

4.  Next  morning  he  bade  both  the  women  accompany  him,  as  he  intended  fishing 
in  the  pond,  and  he  merely  wanted  them  to  do  the  cooking  and  make  the  fire.  When 
fire  had  been  made,  he  brought  them  a  turtle,  which  they  put  on  the  hot  aabee  with- 
out killing  it,  so  it  promptly  crawled  out;  they  pushed  it  on  again,  but  with  the 
same  result.  It  was  the  omen  betokening  their  death.  The  semi-chichi  [medicine- 
man] had  bewitched  them  and  they  thought  they  had  already  killed  the  turtle. 
What  they  imagined  was  that  the  fire  was  not  hot  enough,  and  so  the  faithless 
spouse  went  to  look  for  more  dry  wood.  Now,  as  she  was  breaking  up  the  timber 
she  found  it  very  hard  work,  and  exclaimed  Tata — Ketaiaba  (lit.  hard — to  break), 
but  no  sooner  were  the  words  out  of  her  mouth,  than  she  flew  away  as  a  hawk,  the 
"bul-tata,"  which  can  often  be  heard  crying  bul-tota-tota-tata.  .  .  Of  course  it 
was  her  husband  who  had  done  this.  The  other  wife  said  she  felt  hot  and  would 
bathe  her  skin;  no  sooner  had  she  ducked  into  the  pond,  than  her  husband  turned 
her  into  a  porpoise — she  was  the  very  first  porpoise  that  ever  swam  in  these  waters. 

5.  Hariwali  thus  punished  his  wives,  and  now  pondered  over  what  he  should  do 
with  his  brother.  While  returning  home,  he  met  the  very  man  with  bow  and  arrows 
startLug  out  to  hunt,  but  neither  spoke.  That  same  afternoon  the  brother,  who  had 
never  missed  a  bird  before,  made  a  bad  shot  every  time  now,  the  arrow  invariably 
flying  absurdly  wide  of  its  mark.  This  was  really  all  HariwaU's  doing.  At  last  the 
brother  did  manage  to  hit  a  bird,  but  only  just  hard  enough  to  knock  a  few  feathers 
off,  nothing  more.  "Don't  do  that  again,"  said  the  bird,  "and  now  look  behind 
you."  And  when  he  did  so,  there  was  a  large  sheet  of  water,  and  he  realized  that  he 
was  upon  an  island.  But  how  to  escape?  Round  and  round  he  wandered,  until  he 
finally  found  a  path;  no  ordinary  path,  but  a  Yawahu's  path  leading  to  the  Spirit's 
house.  Arrived  at  the  house,  the  Yawahu  caught  him,  and  took  all  his  bones  out 
except  those  of  his  fingers;  this  was  done  only  out  of  kindness,  so  that  he  could  not 
escape,  the  Yawahu  putting  him  into  a  hammock  and  paying  him  ever,-  care  and 
attention.'  The  bones  themselves  were  tied  up  in  a  bundle  under  the  roof  (aa 
bundles  are  kept  by  many  other  Indian  tribes).  The  Yawahu  was  quite  a  family 
man,  with  plenty  of  youngsters  who  were  always  practising  with  their  bows  and  arrows; 
when  their  arrows  got  blunted  they  had  only  to  go  up  to  the  captive's  hammock  and 
sharpen  them  on  his  bony  finger  tips.  All  this  time,  Hariwali's  mother  would  cry 
regularly  every  night  over  her  absent  son,  whose  whereabouts  and  condition  she 
was  absolutely  ignorant  of.  So  at  last  the  piai's  heart  became  softened,  and  he 
determined  on  going  to  fetch  his  brother  home  again.  It  was  all  due  to  his 
"medicine"  that  his  brother  fell  into  the  clutches  of  the  Spirits.  He  told  the  old 
woman  to  pack  up  everything,  because  when  he  returned  with  his  brother  they  and 
all  their  family  would  have  to  leave  the  place  forever. 

6.  The  night  previous  to  their  departure,  he  "played  the  ehakshak"  (i.  «.,  called 
up  his  Spirit  friends  with  the  rattle),  and  next  morning  hosts  of  parrots  were  passing 
overhead.  His  children  called  his  attention  to  them;  so  he  went  out  and  asked  the 
birds  to  throw  down  a  seed  of  a  certain  tree  the  bark  of  which  he  used  medicinally. 
This  they  did,  and  though  theyoungsterssawtheseed  falling,  directly  it  touched  ground 
the  father  put  his  foot  on  it,  and  look  as  much  as  they  could,  the  children  could  not  find 
it.  As  he  did  not  want  them  to  know  what  he  was  doing,  he  told  them  that  nothing 
had  fallen,  that  they  must  be  mistaken,  and  that  they  must  run  away  now.  Young 
folk  are  not  allowed  to  see  what  the  old  medicine-men  practise.  When  left  alone, 
Hariwali  planted  the  identical  seed  just  where  it  had  fallen,  and  that  same  evening 

>  Compare  Kon,  the  boneless  Tribal  Hero  of  the  Yunka  Indians  of  Peru  (PE,  29,  41).— W.  E.  R. 


122  ANIMISM   AND   FOLK-LORE   OF   GITANA   INDIANS   [eth.  ann.  30 

repeated  the  performance  with  the  rattle;  by  next  morning  a  stately  tree  had  grown 
from  that  one  seed.  He  told  his  mother  to  tie  all  the  things  which  she  had  packed 
up,  on  the  branches  of  this  tree  (Sect.  1186),  and  to  await  his  and  his  brother's  return. 

7.  It  was  not  long  before  he  reached  the  Yawabu's  place,  where,  the  family  being 
away,  he  had  no  difficulty  in  releasing  the  captive,  untying  the  bones  from  the  roof, 
and  making  good  his  escape.  Unfortunately  the  Spirit  returned  earlier  than  was 
expected,  and  seeing  the  empty  hammock  and  no  parcel  of  bones,  was  not  long  in 
concluding  what  had  happened.  He  recognized  the  fresh  tracks,  and  put  his 
dogs  on  the  scent.  Poor  Haiiwali  and  his  biodier!  They  heard  the  barking  of  the 
dogs  and  the  whistling  of  the  Spirit,  and  barely  had  time  to  crawl  into  an  armadillo 
hole.  They  just  managed  to  get  out  of  sight  when  Yawahu  came  up,  threaten- 
ing that  if  they  did  not  come  out,  he  would  drive  a  stick  into  them;  the  fugitives 
laid  low,  and  said  nothing.  Yawahu  then  shoved  a  stick  in,  but  Hariwali  touched 
it  with  his  hand,  and  changed  it  into  a  bush-master  snake.  (This  is  why,  even 
to  the  present  day,  a  bush-master  snake  is  always  found  in  an  armadillo  hole.)  At 
any  rate,  Yawahu  on  seeing  the  serpent  thought  he  must  have  been  mistaken  in  fol- 
lowing the  tracks  and  retraced  his  steps.  Having  put  the  bones  back  into  his 
brother's  skin,  and  waiting  till  the  coast  was  clear,  Hariwali  led  the  way  home. 

8.  And  how  glad  their  mother  was  to  see  them!  She  had  everything  packed  away 
in  and  among  the  branches  of  the  big  tree,  and  she  herself,  her  daughter,  and  the 
grandchildren  were  all  prepared  for  a  long  journey.  As  night  fell,  they  all,  big 
and  little,  climbed  up  into  the  lower  branches,  findu^  shelter  among  the  leaves, 
while  Hariwali  made  his  way  up  to  the  very  summit  and  began  again  the  shahshak 
performance.  This  continued  till  quite  into  the  middle  of  the  night,  when  all 
of  a  sudden,  the  family  below  felt  the  tree  shaking,  and  heard  rumbling  noises,  followed 
by  a  quivering,  and  experienced  a  sensation  of  the  trunk  being  rooted  out  of  the 
sand,  and  starting  to  fly  up  into  the  afr.  Now,  it  was  just  about  the  moment  when 
they  were  off  on  thefr  proposed  journey  that  the  old  woman's  daughter,  the  piai's 
sister,  felt  a  bit  chilly,  and  casting  her  eyes  downward,  remembered  that  she  had 
left  her  apron  behind  in  the  house.  All  she  could  do  was  to  shout  out  to  her 
brother  above,  Deheweyo-daiba  {lit.  "my  apron  back"),  "I  have  forgotten  my  apron," 
and  he  told  her  to  slip  down  quickly  and  fetch  it.  But  by  the  time  she  had  reached 
the  old  home,  she  was  changed  into  a  wicisai-duck  {Anas  autumnalis),  which  even 
yet  can  always  be  heard  saying  dekeweyo-daiba,  but  as  it  only  whisties  these  two 
words,  they  do  not  sound  so  distinctiy  as  if  they  were  spoken  slowly.  As  to  the 
rest  of  the  family — well,  we  know  that  the  wonderful  tree  flew  away  somewhere, 
but  we  have  never  heard  anything  more  about  the  people  who  werg  on  it. 

The  Story  of  Haburi  (W) 

9.  Long  ago,  there  were  two  sisters  minding  themselves;  they  had  no  man  to  look  after 
them.  One  day  they  cut  down  an  ite  tree  {Mauritia),  from  which  they  commenced 
to  manufacture  flour.  It  was  now  late,  so  they  left  their  work  and  went  home.  Next 
morning  when  they  went  back,  the  starch  was  lying  there  all  ready  prepared,  and 
they  were  much  puzzled  to  know  how  this  came  to  be  so.  Next  day,  the  same  thing 
happened — all  the  ite  starch  was  found  ready;  and  t.liig  happened  again,  and  often. 
So  one  night  they  watched,  and  about  the  middle  of  the  night  they  saw  one  of  the 
leaves  of  the  neighboring  manicole  tree  {Euterpe  sp.)  bend  gradually  over  and  over 
until  it  touched  the  cut  which  they  had  made  in  the  trunk  of  the  ite  palm  lying  beneath. 
As  soon  as  the  leaf  actually  touched,  both  sisters  rushed  up  and  caught  hold  of  it, 
begging  it  earnestly  to  turn  into  a  man.  It  refused  at  first,  but  as  tihey  begged  so 
earnestly  it  did  so.  His  name  was  iIayara-k6to.  The  big  (elder)  sister  was  now 
happy  and  by-and-bye  she  had  a  beautiful  baby  boy,  called  Haburi. 


both]  heboes  123 

10.  The  two  women  had  their  hunting  ground  near  two  ponds;  one  of  these  ponda 
belonged  to  Tiger,  but  the  other  one  was  their  own,  in  which  they  therefore  used 
to  fiah.  And  they  told  Mayara-k6to  not  to  go  to  Tiger's  pond.  The  man,  however, 
ssdd,  "Our  pond  has  very  few  fiah  in  it,  but  Tiger's  has  plenty.  I  am  going  to  fish  in 
his. "  He  did  so,  but  Tiger  came  along  and  caught  and  killed  him  for  stealing  his 
fish.  Tiger  then  took  Mayara-k6to"s  shape  and  form,  and  returned  to  the  spot  where 
the  two  women  were  camped.  It  was  very  late  when  he  came  and  quite  dark.  With 
him  he  brought  not  only  Mayara-kdto's  waiyarri  (a  temporary  openwork  basket  made 
of  piabn-leaf)  but  in  it  the  fiah  the  latter  had  stolen  before  being  killed.  Tiger  put 
down  the  waiyarri,  as  is  customary,  before  coming  into  the  house,  and  after  telling 
them  good-night  {lit.  "I  am  come"),  said  he  had  brought  some  fish.  Both  women 
were  astoniahed  at  the  coarse,  rough  voice.  He  then  said  he  was  much  tired,  and 
would  lie  down  in  his  hammock,  telling  them  that  he  would  nurse  Haburi,  who  was 
accordingly  brought  to  him.  He  told  them  also  that  he  was  going  to  sleep,  and  that 
they  must  bring  up  the  fish  and  cook  it,  but  not  to  mind  him.  The  women  cooked  the 
fiah.  VlTien  cooked,  and  while  the  women  were  eating  it,  the  man  fell  asleep  and 
began  to  snore  very  curiously  and  loudly — indeed,  so  loud  that  you  could  have  heard 
him  on  the  other  side  of  the  river.  And  while  snoring,  he  called  the  father's  name — 
Mayara-k6to.  The  two  women  lo<^ed  at  each  other,  and  they  listened.  They  said 
"Our  husband  never  snored  like  that;  he  never  called  his  own  name  before. "  They 
therefore  stopped  eating  at  once,  and  told  each  other  that  this  man  could  not  possibly 
be  their  husband.  And  they  pondered  as  to  how  they  were  going  to  get  Habiui  out 
of  the  man's  arms  where  he  was  resting.  Making  a  bundle  of  a  particular  kind  of  bark, 
they  slipped  it  under  the  child  and  so  got  him  away;  then  tliey  quickly  made  off  with 
Viiiti  while  the  man  was  still  snoring.  With  them  tliey  also  took  a  wa.x  light  and  a 
bundle  of  firewood. 

11.  MTiile  going  along,  they  heard  Wau-uta  singing.  Wau-uta  was  a  woman  in  those 
days,  indeed  she  was  a  piai  woman,  and  she  was  just  then  singing  with  her  shai- 
shak  (rattle).  The  two  women  went  on  and  on,  quickly  too,  for  they  knew  that  once 
they  arrived  at  Wau-uta's  place  they  would  be  safe.  In  the  meantime,  the  Tiger-man 
woke  up  and  found  the  bark  bundle  in  his  arms  instead  of  little  Haburi.  and  both  the 
sisters  gone.  So  he  got  angry;  he  changed  back  into  his  animal  shape,  and  hurried 
after  them.  The  women  heard  him  coming  and  hurried  stiU  more.  They  called  out 
"Wau-uta!  open  the  door. "  "Who  is  there?"  said  Wau-uta,  to  which  she  received 
reply  "It  is  we;  the  two  sisters."  But  Wau-uta  would  not  open  the  door.  So  the 
mother  pinched  little  Haburi's  ears  and  made  him  cry.  Directly  Wau-uta  heard  it  she 
shouted  out,  "What  child  is  that?  Is  it  a  girl  or  a  boy?  "  "It  is  my  Haburi,  a  boy,'' 
was  the  mother's  reply,  upon  which  Wau-uta  opened  tlie  door  immediately  and  said, 
"Come  in!  Come  in! "  Just  after  they  had  all  got  in.  Tiger  arrived  and,  calling  out 
to  Wau-uta,  asked  her  where  the  two  women  and  the  baby  had  gone.  But  Wau-uta 
Ued,  telling  that  ahe  had  not  seen  them,  that  she  had  seen  no  one.  Tiger,  how- 
ever, could  tell  by  the  scent  that  they  were  there,  so  he  waited  outside,  and  refused 
to  go  away.  This  vexed  Wau-uta ,  who  became  ver>-  angry,  and  told  him  that  he  might 
just  put  his  head  in,  and  have  a  look  round,  and  if  he  saw  them,  he  could  eat  them  if 
he  liked.  But  the  door  was  covered  with  pimplers  (thorns)  and  as  soon  as  silly  Tiger 
put  his  head  in.  the  old  woman  closed  it,  and  so  killed  him.  The  two  sisters  remained 
there,  and  cried  much;  they  grieved  for  their  husband.  They  cned  so  much  indeed 
that  Wau-uta  told  them  to  go  into  the  field,  gather  some  cassava,  and  make  a  big  drink. 
They  accordingly  got  ready  to  go,  and  were  about  to  take  Haburi  with  them,  but 
Wau-uta  said,  "  No.  I  am  quite  able  to  look  after  the  child  in  your  absence."  So 
they  did  as  they  were  told  and  went  away  to  the  field. 

12.  In  the  meantime  Wau-uta  made  the  child  grow  all  at  once  into  a  youth,  and 
gave  him  the  ham-harri  to  blow  and  the  arrows  to  shoot.    As  the  mother  and  aunt 


124  ANIMISM   AND   FOLK-LOKE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS   [kth.  ann.  30 

were  returning  with  the  cassava,  they  heard  the  music  playing  and  said  to  themselves, 
"There  was  no  man  or  boy  there  when  we  left  the  house;  who  can  it  be?  It  must 
be  a  man  playing."  And  though  ashamed  they  went  in  and  saw  the  youth  blowing 
the  hairi-hairi.  As  soon  as  they  had  taken  the  quakes  (baskets)  from  off  their  backs 
and  placed  them  on  the  ground,  they  asked  after  Haburi,  but  Wau-uta  said  that  as  soon 
as  they  had  left  for  the  field,  the  child  had  run  after  them,  and  she  had  thought  it  was 
still  with  them.  Of  course  all  this  was  a  He.  Old  Wau-uta  was  desirous  of  making 
Habtui  grow  qtiickly,  with  the  intention  of  making  him  ultimately  her  lover.  She  still 
further  deceived  the  two  sisters  by  pretending  to  assist  in  the  search  which  was  then 
undertaken  in  the  surrounding  bush,  but  she  took  good  care  to  get  back  to  her  house 
first,  and  told  Haburi  to  say  she,  Wau-uta,  was  his  mother,  and  gave  him  full  direc- 
tions as  to  how  he  must  treat  her. 

13.  Haburi  was  a  splendid  shot — no  bird  could  escape  his  arrow — and  Wau-uta 
directed  him  to  give  to  her  all  the  big  birds  that. he  HUed,  and  to  his  mother  and 
aunt  all  the  little  ones,  which  he  had  to  pollute  first  by  fouling  them.  The  object 
of  this  was  to  make  the  two  sisters  so  vexed  and  angry  that  they  would  leave  the  place : 
but  this  they  would  not  do;  they  continued  searching  the  neighborhood  for  their 
little  child.  This  sort  of  thing  went  on  for  many  days,  big  birds  and  dirtied  litfle 
birds  being  presented  by  Haburi  to  Wau-uta  and  the  two  women,  respectively. 
Haburi,  however,  did  one  day  miss  a  bird  for  the  first  time,  his  arrow  sticking  into  a 
branch  overhanging  a  creek  where  his  uncles,  the  water-dogs,  used  to  come  and  feed. 
It  was  a  nice  cleared  space,  and  here  Haburi  eased  himself,  covering  the  dung  with 
leaves.  He  next  climbed  the  tree  to  dislodge  the  arrow,  but  just  then  the  water-dogs 
arrived,  and,  scenting  the  air,  exclaimed,  "What  smell  is  this?  That  worthless 
nephew  of  ours,  Haburi,  must  be  somewhere  about."  So  they  looked  around,  and 
down,  and  up,  and  finally  discovering  him  on  the  tree  branch,  ordered  him  to  come 
down.  They  then  sat  him  on  a  bench,  and  told  him  he  was  leading  a  bad  life,  that 
the  old  woman  was  not  his  mother,  but  that  the  two  younger  ones  were  his  mother  and 
aunt,  respectively;  they  furthermore  impressed  upon  him  that  it  was  very  wicked  of 
hiTin  to  divide  the  birds  so  unfairly,  and  that  in  future  he  must  do  exactiy  the  opposite, 
giving  his  real  mother,  the  bigger  of  the  two  sisters,  the  larger  birds.  They  told 
him  also  to  let  his  real  mother  know  that  the  way  he  had  hitherto  treated  her  was 
due  entirely  to  ignorance  on  his  part,  and  that  he  was  sorry. 

14.  So  when  Haburi  got  home  that  day,  he  carried  out  the  instructions  given  him 
by  the  water-dogs,  handing  the  dirtied  little  birds  to  Wau-uta,  and  making  a  clean 
breast  of  it  to  his  mother.  She,  poor  thing,  felt  very  strange  that  day,  and  could  not 
bring  herself  to  speak  to  him  as  "my  son  "  all  at  once,  but  when  he  explained  that  it  was 
only  Wau-uta  who  had  made  him  a  man  quite  suddenly,  she  believed  him,  and  became 
quite  comforted.  Old  Wau-uta,  on  hearing  all  this,  worked  herself  into  a  great  passion, 
and,  seizing  Haburi  by  the  neck,  blew  into  his  face  (Sect.  85),  and  told  him  he  must 
be  mad;  so  angered  and  upset  was  she  that  she  could  eat  nothing  at  all.  She  spent 
all  that  day  and  night  in  nagging  him,  and  telling  him  he  had  left  his  senses.  Habini 
went  away  next  morning  as  usual,  returning  late  in  the  afternoon,  when  he  E^ain  gave 
the  big  birds  which  he  had  shot  to  his  real  mother  and  the  dirtied  little  ones  to  Wau-uta. 
The  latter,  as  might  have  been  expected,  gave  him  no  peace. 

15.  Haburi,  therefore,  made  up  his  mind  to  get  out.  So  telling  his  mother  that 
they  must  all  three  arrange  to  get  away  together,  he  made  a  little  corial  (a  dug- 
out canoe)  of  bees' -wax,  and  when  completed,  he  left  it  at  the  water-side;  but,  by 
next  morning  a  black  duck  had  taken  it  away.  He  therefore  made  another  little  clay 
corial,  but  this  was  stolen  by  another  kind  of  duck.  In  the  meantime  he  cut  a  large 
field,  and  cleared  it  so  quickly  that  the  women  with  their  planting  could  never  keep 
up  with  him.  They  required  plenty  of  cassava  for  their  proposed  journey.  At  any 
rate,  while  the  women  planted,  Haburi  would  often  slip  away  and  make  a  boat,  always 
of  a  different  kind  of  wood  and  of  varying  shape,  and  just  as  regularly  would  a  dif- 


BOTH]  HEEOES  125 

ferent  species  of  duck  come  and  steal  it.  At  last  lie  happened  to  make  one  out  of  the 
silk-cotton  tree  and  this  ijarticular  one  was  not  stolen.  It  was  thus  Btiburi  who  first 
made  a  boat  and  taught  the  ducks  to  float  on  the  surface  of  the  water  because  it  was 
with  his  boats  that  they  managed  to  do  it;  indeed,  we  Warraus  say  that  each  duck  has 
its  own  particular  kind  of  boat. 

16.  But  what  was  more  curious,  the  last  boat  to  be  manufactured  was  found  next  morn- 
ing to  be  very  much  bigger  than  it  was  the  night  before.  Haburi  told  his  mother  and 
her  sister  to  collect  all  the  provisions  and  put  them  aboard  in  anticipation  of  their 
long  journey.  He  himself  returned  to  the  field,  bringing  the  cassava  cuttings  for 
old  Wau-uta  to  plant  in  their  re8i)ective  holes,  and  so  they  both  continued  working 
hard.  By  and  bye,  he  slipped  away,  went  back  to  the  house,  took  his  arrows  and  ax, 
and  proceeded  down  to  the  water-side.  But  before  he  left  the  house,  he  told  the 
posts  not  to  talk,  for  in  those  days  the  posts  of  a  house  could  speak  (Sect.  769),  and 
if  the  owner  were  absent  a  visitor  could  thus  find  out  his  whereabouts.  There  was 
a  parrot,  however,  in  the  house,  and  Habiui  quite  forgot  to  warn  him  to  keep  silent. 
So  when  the  old  woman  after  a  time  found  herself  alone,  she  went  back  to  the  house, 
and  seeing  no  Haburi,  asked  the  posts  whither  he  had  gone;  they  remained  silent. 
The  parrot,  however,  could  not  help  talking,  and  told  her. 

17.  Wau-uta  thereupon  rushed  down  to  the  landing,  arri\-ing  there  just  in  time 
to  see  Haburi  stepping  into  the  boat  to  join  his  mother  and  aunt.  She  seized  hold 
of  the  craft,  screaming ' '  My  son !  My  son !  you  must  not  leave  me  so .  I  am  yoiu-  mother, ' ' 
and  though  they  all  repeatedly  struck  her  fingers  with  their  paddles,  and  almost 
smashed  them  to  pieces  on  the  gunwale,  she  would  not  let  go  her  hold.  So  poor 
Haburi  had  perforce  to  land  again  and  with  old  Wau-uta  proceeded  to  a  large  hoUow 
tree  wherein  the  bees  had  built  their  nest.  Cutting  down  the  tree,  Haburi  made  a 
small  hole  in  the  trunk,  and  told  the  old  lady  to  get  in  and  suck  the  honey.  She  was 
very  fond  of  honey,  and  though  crying  very  hsird  all  the  time  at  the  thqught  of  losing 
Haburi,  crawled  through  the  little  opening  which  he  immediately  closed  in  upon  her. 
And  there  she  is  to  be  found  to  the  present  day,  the  Wau-uta  frog  which  is  heard  only 
in  hollow  trees.  And  if  you  look  carefully,  you  will  see  how  swollen  her  fingers  are 
from  the  way  in  which  they  were  bashed  by  the  paddles  when  she  tried  to  hold  on 
to  the  gunwale.  If  you  listen,  you  can  also  hear  her  lamenting  for  her  lost  lover; 
she  still  cries  Wang  I  Wang!  Wang/ 

18.  The  tree-frog  above  referred  to  is  probably  the  lcono(bo)-aru,  or 
rain-frog,  the  name  given  to  the  old  woman  in  the  Carib  version  of  the 
story  (Sect.  35) .  The  croaking  of  this  creature  {Hyla  venulosa  Daud.) 
is  an  absolutely  sure  sign  of  rain.  This  frog  lives  only  in  the  tnmk  of 
the  Bodelschmngia  macrophyUa  Klotzsch,  a  tree  found  on  the  Pome- 
roon  and  Barama  (So  R,  ii,  419).  Though  the  Warraus  are  believed 
to  have  been  the  first  of  the  Guiana  Indians  to  use  boats,  the  invention 
of  the  sail  has  been  credited  to  the  Caribs.  A  modem  addition  to  the 
above  version  of  the  story  is  that  Habtui  sailed  away,  found  new 
lands,  and  taught  the  white  people  all  their  arts  and  manufactures, 
all  about  gims  and  ships,  and  for  many  years  used  to  send  his  old 
Warrau  friends  certain  presents  annually,  but  they  never  come  now— 
an  unscrupulous  Government  detains  them  in  Geoi^etown! 

19.  With  regard  to  Koroiomanna,  or  Kururumanni,  the  same 
remarks  concerning  his  tribal  origin  apply  as  in  the  case  of  Habuii. 
HUhouse  and  Schomburgk  (Sc  R,  ii,  319)  seemingly  would  have  him  an 
Arawak,  but  Brett  undoubtedly  makes  him  a  Warrau,  the  view  which 


126  ANIMISM    AND    FOLK-LOKE    OF    GUIANA   INDIANS    [eth.  ANN.  30 

is  held  by  the  present-day  Wairaus  and  Arawaks  on  the  Pomeroon. 
He  is  said  to  be  the  creator  of  the  male  portion  of  mankind,  another 
Spirit,  Kulimina,'  being  responsible  for  the  female.  Uri-Kaddo  and 
Emeshi  are  his  two  wives,  one  name  signifying  'darkness-people,' 
'  a  worker  in  darkness,'  and  the  other  a  large  red  ant  that  burrows  in 
the  earth;  "together,  they  are  typical  of  the  creation  of  all  things 
out  of  the  earth  ia  the  dark"  (HiC,  244).  Kororo  manna  would  seem 
to  have  experienced  a  remarkable  number  and  variety  of  adventures, 
some  of  which  are  given  here. 

The  Adventukes  or  Koeoromanna  (W) 

Kororomaima  went  out  hunting  and  shot  a  "baboon"  ( Jf^cet««),butas  itwasabeady 
late  in  the  afternoon,  in  trying  to  make  his  way  home  he  lost  his  way  in  the  darkness. 
And  there  he  had  to  make  his  banab,  and  to  lie  down,  with  the  baboon  beside  him. 
But  where  he  lay  was  a  Hebu  road;  you  can  always  distinguish  a  Spirit  road  from 
any  other  pathway  in  the  forest  because  the  Hebus  occupying  the  trees  that  lie 
alongside  it  are  always,  especially  at  night,  striking  the  branches  and  trunks,  and  so 
producing  short  sharp  crackling  noises  [Sect.  104]-  It  was  not  pleasant  for  poor 
Kororomanna,  especially  as  the  baboon's  body  was  now  b^inning  to  swell  with  all 
the  noxious  humors  inside;  lest  the  Hebus  should  steal  it  from  him,  he  was  obliged 
to  keep  the  carcass  alongside  and  watch  over  it  with  a  stick.  At  last  he  fell  asleep, 
but  in  the  middle  of  the  night  the  -Hebus,  what  with  the  knocking  on  the  trees, 
aroused  him  from  his  slumbers.  Now  that  he  was  awake,  he  mimicked  the  Spirits, 
blow  for  blow,  and  as  they  struck  the  limb  of  a  tree,  Kororomanna  would  strike  the 
belly  of  the  baboon.  But  what  with  the  air  inside,  each  time  he  struck  the  animal, 
there  came  a  resonant  Boom!  Boom!  just  like  the'  beating  of  a  drvim.'  The  Hebu 
leader  heard  the  curious  sound,  and  became  a  bit  frightened:  "What  can  it  be? 
When  before  I  knocked  a  tree,  it  never  made  a  noise  like  that."  To  make  sure, 
however,  he  struck  the  tree  hard  again,  and  Boom!  came  once  more  from  the 
carcass.  Hebu  was  reaUy  frightened  now,  and  begs^i  to  search  aU  around  to  find  out 
where  the  extraordinary  noise  could  possibly  come  irom;  at  last  he  recognized  the 
little  manicole  banab,  and  saw  Kororomanna  laughing.  Indeed,  the  latter  could 
not  help  laughing,  considering  that  it  was  the  first  time  he  had  heard  such  a  funny 
sound  come  out  of  any  animal. 

20.  Hebu  then  said  to  him,  "'VMio  are  you?  Show  me  your  hand,"  to  which 
Kororomanna  replied,  "I  am^^arrau,  and  here  is  my  hand, "  butinstead  of  putting  out 
his  own,  he  showed  forward  one  of  the  baboon's,  and  then  held  forward  the  animal's 
other  hand,  and  finally  both  feet.  Hebu  was  much  puzzled  and  said  he  had  never 
seen  before  a  "Warrau  with  so  black  a  hand,  and  would  not  be  satisfied  until  he  saw  the 
face.  Kororomanna  accordingly  deceived  him  again  and  held  out  the  monkey's,  which 
caused  Hebu  to  make  the  same  remark  about  his  face  as  he  had  done  about  his  hands 
and  feet. 

21.  The  Spirit  became  more  frightened  than  ever,  but  his  curiosity  exceeded  his 
fear,  because  he  next  wanted  to  know  where  all  that  Boom!  Boom!  sound  had  come 
from.  And  when  he  learnt  its  source  of  origin  (breaking  wind),  he  regretted  that  he 
had  not  been  made  like  ordinary  mortals,  he  and  all  his  family  having  no  proper 
posteriors,  but  just  a  red  spot  (Sect.  99).  He  thereupon  begged  Kororomanna  to  make 
for  him  a  posterior  ^hich  would  allow  of  his  producing  a  similar  sound.  So  with 
his  bow  Kororomanna  split  the  Spirit's  hind  quarters,  and  completed  the   task 

1  A  name  I  hare  been  unable  to  trace. — W.  E.  R. 

»  One  end  of  the  drum  is  commonly  closed  with  baboon  hide. 


BOTH]  HEKOES  127 

by  impaling  him,  but  so  rough  was  he  in  his  methods,  that  the  weapon  transfixed 
the  whole  body  even  piercing  the  unfortunate  Hebu's  head.  The  Hebu  cursed  Koro- 
romanna  for  having  killed  him,  and  threatened  that  the  other  Spirits  would  avenge 
his  death:  he  then  disappeared. 

23.  OiU"  hero,  becoming  a  bit  anxious  on  his  own  account,  and,  recognizing  by  the 
gradually  increasLng  hullaballoo  in  the  trees  that  swarms  of  Hebus  were  approaching 
the  scene  of  the  outrs^e,  now  climbed  the  manicole  tree  sheltering  his  banab,  leaving 
the  baboon's  corpse  inside.  The  Spirits  then  entered  the  banab,  and  believing  the 
dead  animal  to  be  Kororomanna,  began  hitting  it  with  their  sticks,  and  with  each  blow, 
there  came  Boom!  Our  friend  up  the  tree,  whence  he  covdd  watch  their  every  move- 
ment, and  their  surprise  at  the  acoustic  results  of  the  flogging,  could  not  refrain  from 
cracking  a  smile,  which  soon  gave  way  to  a  hearty  laugh.  The  Spirits,  unfortunately 
for  him,  heard  it,  and  looking  at  the  dead  baboon,  said,  "This  can  not  be  the  person 
who  is  laughing  at  us. "  They  looked  all  around,  but  could  see  nothing,  until  one  of 
them  stood  on  his  head,  and  peeped  up  into  the  tree.'  And  there,  sure  enough,  he 
saw  Kororomanna  laughing  at  them.  All  the  others  then  put  themselves  in  the  same 
posture  around  the  tree,  and  had  a  good  look  at  him.  The  question  they  next  had  to 
decide  was  how  to  catch  him.  This  they  concluded  could  most  easily  be  managed 
by  hewing  down  the  tree.  They  accordingly  started  with  their  axes  on  the  trunk,  but 
since  the  implements  were  but  water-turtle  shells,  it  was  not  lor^  before  they  broke. ^ 
They  then  sent  for  their  knives,  but  as  these  were  merely  the  seed-pods  of  the  buari 
tree,  they  also  soon  broke.'  The  Hebus  then  sent  for  a  rope,  but  what  they  called  a 
rope  was  really  a  snake.  At  any  rate,  as  the  serpent  made  its  way  farther  and  farther 
up  the  tree,  and  finally  came  within  reach,  Kororomanna  cut  its  head  off;  the  animal 
fell  to  the  ground  again,  and  the  Hebus  cried  "Our  rope  has  burst. "  Another  con- 
sultation was  held,  and  it  was  decided  that  one  of  their  number  should  climb  the  tree, 
seize  the  man,  and  throw  him  down,  and  that  those  below  might  be  ready  to  receive 
him  when  dislodged,  the  Hebu  was  to  shout  out,  when  throwing  him  down,  the  follow- 
ing signal:  Tura-huna-at  mahara-ko  na-hai.*  The  biggest  of  the  Spirits  being  chosen  to 
carry  the  project  into  execution,  he  started  on  his  climb ,  but  head  dow  nward  of  course, 
so  as  to  be  able  to  see  where  he  was  going.  Kororomanna,  however,  was  on  the  alert, 
and,  waiting  for  him,  killed  him  in  the  same  peculiar  manner  as  that  in  which  he  had 
despatched  the  other  Spirit  just  a  little  while  before;  more  than  this,  ha\-ing  heard 
them  fix  upon  the  preconcerted  signal,  he  hurled  the  dead  Spirit's  body  down  with  the 
cry  of  Tura-buna-si  mahara-ko  na-kai!  The  Hebus  below  were  quite  prepared,  and  as 
soon  as  the  body  fell  to  the  ground,  clubbed  it  to  pieces.  Kororomanna  then  slipped 
down  and  helped  in  the  dissolution.  "Wait  a  bit,"  he  said  to  the  Spirits;  "I  am 
just,  going  in  the  bush,  but  will  soon  return. "  It  was  not  very  long,  however,  before 
the  Spirits  saw  that  they  had  been  tricked,  and  yeUed  with  rage  on  finding  that  they 
had  really  destroyed  one  of  themselves;  they  hunted  high  and  low  for  their  man,  but 
with  approaching  daylight  were  reluctantly  compelled  to  give  up  the  chase. 

33.  In  the  meantime,  Kororomanna  had  no  sooner  got  out  of  their  sight  than  he 
started  running  at  topmost  speed,  and  finally  found  shelter  in  a  hollow  tree.  Here 
he  discovered  a  woman  (she  was  not  old  either),  so  he  told  her  that  he  would  remain 
with  her  till  "the  day  cleaned"  (i.  e.,  till  dawn  broke).     But  she  said,  "No!  No!  my 

1  The  Hebus  of  the  Warraus  are  believed  to  possess  eye-brows  so  promment  that  it  is  possible  for  them 
to  look  directly  upward  only  when  in  this  upside-down  position.    [Seot.  99.] 

'  On  the  Amazons,  before  the  advent  of  Europeans,  we  have  Acufia's  authority  for  stating  that  all  the 
tools  which  the  Indians  employed  for  making  their  canoes,  huts,  etc.,  were  axes  and  hatchets  made  of 
tortofeo-shell  (Ac,  90) . 

>  The  seed-po*  in  question  is  about  10  in.  long,  much  flattened,  hard-shelled,  with  a  curved  surface,  so 
that  when  the  halves  are  split  asunder,  each  bears  a  somewhat  fanciful  resemblance  to  a  cutlass. 

«  The  first  word  Is  in  Spirit  language,  i. «.,  not  understood  by  the  Warraus,  who  tell  me  that  it  is  nothing 
more  than  a  watch-word;  the  second  means  "to  kill  with  the  arm;"  the  third  indicates  "to  fall  down."— 
W.  E.R. 


128  ANIMISM   AND   FOLK-LORE   OF   GUIANA   INDIANS    [eth.  ank.  30 

man  is  Snake  and  he  will  be  back  before  the  dawn.  If  he  were  to  find  you  here,  he 
would  certainly  Mil  you."  But  her  visitor  was  not  to  be  frightened,  and  he  stayed 
where  he  was.  True  enough,  before  dawn,  Snake  came  wending  his  way  home,  and 
as  he  crawled  into  the  tree,  he  was  heard  to  exclaim,  "Hallo!  I  can  smell  some  one." 
Kororomanna  was  indeed  frightened  now,  and  was  at  his  wits'  end  to  know  what  to 
do.  Just  then  dawn  broke,  and  they  heard  a  hummingbird.  "That  is  my  uncle," 
said  our  hero.  They  then  heard  the  doroquaira:  "That  also  is  aii  uncle  of  mine, "  he 
added.'  He  purposely  told  Snake  all  this  to  make  him  believe  that,  if  he  killed  and 
swallowed  his  visitor,  all  the  other  hummingbirds  and  doroquarras  would  come  and 
avenge  his  death.  But  Snake  said,  "I  am  not  afraid  of  either  of  your  uncles,  but 
will  gobble  them  up."  Just  then,  a  chicken-hawk  (Urubitinga)  flew  along,  which 
made  Snake  ask  whether  that  also  was  an  uncle  of  his.  "To  be  sure  "  was  the  reply, 
"and  when  I  am  dead,  he  also  will  come  and  search  for  me."  It  was  now  Snake's 
turn  to  be  frightened,  because  Chicken-hawk  used  always  to  get  the  better  of  him; 
so  he  let  Kororomanna  go  in  peace,  who  ran  out  of  that  hollow  tree  pretty  quick. 

34.  It  was  full  daylight  now,  but  this  made  little  odds,  because  he  had  still  lost 
his  way,  and  knew  not  how  to  find  the  road  home.  After  wandering  on  and  on, 
he  at  last  came  across  a  track,  recognizable  by  the  footprints  in  it:  following  this  up, 
he  came  upon  a  hollow  tree  that  had  fallen  across  the  path,  and  inside  the  trunk  he 
saw  a  baby.  This  being  a  Hebu's  child,  he  slaughtered  it,  but  he  had  no  sooner 
done  so  than  he  heard  approaching  footsteps,  which  caused  him  promptly  to  climb  a 
neighboring  tree  and  await  developments.  These  were  not  long  in  coming,  for  the 
mother  soon  put  in  her  appearance;  as  soon  as  she  recognized  her  dead  infant,  she 
was  much  angered,  and,  looking  around,  carefully  examined  the  fresh  tracks,  and 
fiaid,  "This  is  the  man  who  has  killed  my  child."  Her  next  move  was  to  dig  up  a 
bit  of  the  soil  marked  by  one  of  the  fresh  footprints,  wrap  it  up  in  a  leaf  tied  with 
bush-rope,  and  hang  it  on  a  branch  while  she  went  for  firewood.  Directly  her  back 
was  turned,  Kororomanna  slid  down  from  his  hiding  place,  undid  the  bundle,  and 
threw  away  the  contents,  substituting  a  footprint  of  the  Spirit  woman.  Then,  tying 
up  the  parcel  as  before,  he  hung  it  where  it  had  been  left,  and  hid  himself  once  more. 
When  the  woman  returned  with  the  firewood,  she  made  a  big  fire,  and  threw  the 
bundle  into  the  flames,  saying  as  she  did  so:  "Curse  the  jierson  whose  footprint  I 
now  bum.  May  the  owner  fall  into  this  fire  also! "  She  thought  that  if  she  burnt 
the  "foot-mark"  so  would  the  person's  shadow  be  drawn  to  the  fire.  But  no  one 
came,  and  she  felt  that  her  own  shadow  was  being  impelled.  "Oh!  It  seems  that  I 
am  hurting  myself;  the  fire  is  drawing  me  near, "  she  exclaimed.  Twice  waa  she  thus 
dragged  toward  it  against  her  will,  and  yet  she  succeeded  in  resisting.  But  on  the 
third  occasion  she  could  not  draw  back;  she  fell  in,  and  was  burnt  to  ashes;  she 
"roasted  herself  dead." ' 

ZS.  Kororomanna  was  again  free  to  travel,  but  which  direction  to  follow  was  the 
puzzle;  he  had  still  lost  his  way  home.  All  he  could  do  was  to  walk  more  or  less 
aimlessly  on,  passing  creek  after  creek  and  back  into  the'bush  again,  until  he  emerged 
on  a  beautiful,  clean  roadway.  But  no  sooner  had  he  put  his  foot  on  it,  than  it 
stuck  there,  just  like  a  fish  caught  in  a  spring-trap.  And  this  is  exactly  what  the 
trap  really  was,  save  that  it  had  been  set  by  the  Hebus.  He  pulled  and  he  tugged 
and  he  twisted,  but  try  as  he  might,  he  could  not  get  away.  He  fouled  himself  over 
completely,  and  then  lay  quite  still,  pretending  to  be  dead.  The  flies  gathered  on 
him  and  these  were  followed  by  the  worms,  but  he  continued  to  lie  quite  still.  By 
and  by  two  of  the  Spirits  came  along,  and  one  of  them  said,  "Hallo!  I  have  luck  today. 
My  spring-trap  has  caught  a  fish  at  last,"  but  when  he  got  closer,  he  added,  "Oh!  I 

1  This  bird  is  the  OdoTUophorus  GvianensU.  "The  notes  of  tliis  bird,  from  which  it  takes  its  name,  are 
usually  the  first  heard  in  the  moroing,  and  frequently  before  dawn"  (BW,  183). 

>  Present-day  cursing,  the  ftd-o  of  the  Warraus  and  Arawaks,  is  done  on  somewhat  different  lines, 
usually  by  medicine-men  or  by  very  old  people  oidy. 


BoraJ  HEBOES  129 

have  left  it  too  long.  It  stinks."  However,  they  let  loose  their  fish,  as  they  thought 
it  was,  and  carried  it  down  to  the  riverside  to  wash  and  clean  it.  After  they  had 
washed  it,  one  of  the  Hebus  said,  "  Let  us  slit  its  belly  now,  and  remove  the  entrails,'* 
but  the  other  one  remarked,  "No,  let  us  make  a  waiyarri  (basket)  first,  to  put  the  flesh 
in."  This  was  very  fortunate  for  Kororomanna,  who,  seizing  the  opportunity  whQe 
they  went  collecting  strands  to  plait  with,  rolled  down  the  river  bank  into  the  water 
and  so  made  good  his  escape.  But  when  he  succeeded  in  landing  on  the  other  side, 
he  was,  in  a  sense,  just  as  badly  off  as  before,  not  knowing  how  to  get  home. 

26.  Kororomanna  next  came  across  a  man's  skuU  lying  on  the  ground,  and  what 
must  he  do  but  go  and  jerk  his  arrow  iato  its  eye-ball?  Now  this  skull,  Kwa-muhu, 
was  a  Hebu,  who  thereupon  called  out:  "You  must  not  do  that.  But  now  that  you 
have  injured  me,  you  will  have  to  carry  me."  So  Kororomanna  had  to  get  a  strip  of 
bark,  the  same  kind  which  our  women  employ  for  fastening  on  their  field  quakes, 
and  carry  the  skull  wherever  he  went,  and  feed  it  too.  If  he  shot  bird  or  beast,  he 
always  had  to  give  a  bit  to  Kwa-muhu,  with  the  result  that  the  latter  soon  became 
gradually  and  inconveniently  heavier,  until  one  day  he  became  so  great  a  dead  weight 
as  to  break  the  bark-strip  support.  The  accident  occurred  not  very  far  from  a  creek, 
and  Kororomanna  told  Kwa-muhu  to  stay  still  while  he  went  to  look  for  a  stronger 
strip  of  bark.  Of  course  this  was  only  an  excuse,  because  directly  he  had  put  ihe 
skull  on  the  ground,  he  ran  as  fast  as  he  could  toward  the  creek,  overtaking  on  the 
way  a  deer  that  was  running  in  exactly  the  same  direction,  swam  across,  and  rested 
himself  on  the  opposite  side.  In  the  meantime  Kwa-muhu,  suspecting  that  he  was 
about  to  be  forsaken,  ran  after  Kororomanna,  and  seeing  but  the  deer  in  front  of  him, 
mistook  it  for  his  man  and  killed  it  just  as  it  reached  the  water.  On  examining  the 
carcass,  the  Hebu  exclaimed,  when  he  got  to  its  toes  (Sect.  i26):  "Well,  that  is  indeed 
very  strange.  You  have  only  two  fingers;"  and  though  he  reckoned  again  and 
again,  he  could  make  no  more — "but  the  man  I  am  after  had  five  fingers,  and  a  long 
nose.  You  must  be  somebody  else."  '  Now  Kororomanna,  who  was  squatting  just 
over  on  the  opposite  bank,  heard  all  this,  and  burst  out  laughing.  "This  enraged 
Kwa-muhu,  who  left  the  deer,  and  made  a  move  as  if  to  leap  across  the  creek,  but, 
having  no  legs,  he  could  not  jump  properly,  and  hence  fell  into  the  water  and  was 
drowned.     All  the  ants  then  came  out  of  his  skull." 

27.  Poor  Kororomanna  was  still  as  badly  off  as  before;  he  was  unable  to  find  his 
way  I^ome.  But  he  bravely  kept  on  his  way  and  at  last  came  upon  an  old  man  bailing 
water  out  of  a  pond.  The  latter  was  really  a  Hebu,  whose  name  was  Huta-Kura- 
kura, '  Red-back '  (Sect.  99).  Huta-Kurakura,  being  anxious  to  get  the  fish,  was  bailing 
away  at  the  water  side  as  hard  as  he  could  go,  but  ha\'ing  no  calabash  had  to  make  use 
of  his  purse  [scrotum],  which  was  verj-  large.  And  while  thus  bending  down,  he  was 
80  preoccupied  that  he  did  not  hear  the  footfall  of  Kororomanna  coming  up  behind. 
The  latter,  not  knowing  what  sort  of  a  creature  it  was,  stuck  hini  twice  in  the  back 
with  an  arrow,  but  Huta-Kurakura,  thinking  it  to  be  a  cow-fly  ( Tabanus),  just  slapped 
the  spot  where  he  felt  it.  When,  however,  he  found  himself  stuck  a  third  time,  he 
turned  round  and,  seeing  who  it  was,  became  so  enraged  that  he  seized  the  wan- 
derer and  hurled  him  into  a  piece  of  wood  with  such  force  that  only  his  eye 
projected  from  out  the  timber.  Anxious  to  be  freed  from  his  unenviable  position 
Kororomanna  offered  everything  he  could  think  of — crystals,  rattles,  paiwarri,  women, 
etc.,  but  the  Spirit  wanted  none  of  them.  As  a  last  chance,  he  offered  tobacco,  and 
this  the  Hebu  eagerly  accepted,  the  result  being  that  they  fast  became  good  friends. 
They  then  both  emptied  the  pond  and  collected  a  heap  of  fish,  much  too  large  for 

1  The  account  given  of  Eororomanna's  doings  in  this  paragraph  forms  the  complete  story  of  an  unnamed 
Indian,  as  related  bj  the  Caribs,  who  give  the  name  Pupombo  to  the  Skull  Spirit. 

>  Ehrenreich  refers  to  the  many  examples  of  such  individual  giant  heads  or  skulls  in  the  North  American 
legends  (PE,  71). 

15961°— 30  ETH— 15 9 


130  AiaMISM  AXD   FOLK-LORE  OF   GTJIAITA   INDIANS    [eth.  asn.  30 

Koroiomaima  to  carry  home.  So  tlie  Spirit  in  some  peculiar  way  bound  them  all 
up  into  quite  a  small  bundle,  small  enough  for  Eororomanna  to  carry  in  his  hand. 

38.  Kororomanna  now  soon  managed  to  find  the  right  path  home,  because  each 
and  every  animal  that  he  met  gave  him  news  of  his  mother.  One  after  the  other,  he 
met  a  rat  with  a  potato ,  an  acouri  with  cassava  root,  a  labba  with  a  yam,  a  deer  with  a 
cassava  leaf,  a  kushi-ant  with  a  similar  leaf  on  its  head,  and  a  bush-cow  (tapir)  eating  a 
pineapple.  And  as  he  asked  each  in  turn  whence  it  had  come,  the  animal  said,  "I 
have  been  to  your  mother,  and  have  b^ged  potato,  cassava,  yam,  and  other  things 
from  her."  When  at  length  he  reached  home,  and  his  wife  and  mother  asked  what 
he  had  brought,  he  told  them  a  lot  of  fish,  and  they  laughed  light  heartily  at  what 
they  thought  was  his  little  joke.  So  he  bade  them  open  the  parcel,  and  as  they 
opened  it,  sure  enough  out  came  fish  after  fish,  small  and  large,  fish  of  all  kinds,  so 
many  in  fact  that  the  house  speedily  became  filled,  and  the  occupants  had  to  shift 
outside.     [Cf.  Sect.  505.] 

28A.  [Note. — In  a  Carib  version  of  the  story  the  hero's  name  is  given  as  Kere-Kere'- 
miyu-au,  and  he  finds  his  way  back  home  to  his  mother's  place  through  the  help 
of  a  butterfly.  'When  I  happened  to  mention  to  the  narrator  that  this  was  the  first 
time  I  had  ever  heard  a  '"  Nancy  "  storj-  about  this  insect,  he  told  me  that  the  butterfly 
was  always  a  good  friend  of  the  Caribs.  "  Does  it  not,"  he  added,  "come  and  drink 
of  the  washings  from  the  cassiri  jar,  and  remain  stuck  in  the  mess?"  (i.  e.,  "Does  it 
not  come  and  join  in  oui  feasts,  and  get  so  drunk  that  it  can  not  fly  away?  "). — W.  E.  R.] 

29.  Makiinaima,  or  Makonaima,  the  alleged  God  (ScR,  n,  225,  515) 
or  Supreme  Being  (IT,  365)  of  the  Akawais,  the  Maker  of  Heaven 
and  Earth  (ScR,  n,  319)  of  the  Makusis,  was  one  of  the  twin  children 
of  the  Sim — ia  this  particular  all  the  traditions  concerning  him  are 
in  agreement.  He  and  his  brother  Pia  may  be  regarded  as  both 
Akawai  and  Makusi  heroes.  The  name  itself,  Makunaima,  signifies 
"one  that  works  in  the  dark"  (HiC,  244);  the  Being  working  in 
opposition  to  him,  according  to  Makusi  behefs,  is  Epel  (ScR,  loc.  cit.). 
I  am  fortunately  able  to  give  three  versions  of  the  tradition  of  these 
Heroes — ^from  Warrau,  Carib,  and  Makusi  sources,  respectively. 

The  Stin,  the  Feog,  and  the  Fikesticks  (W) 

Nahakoboni  {lit.,  the  one  who  eats  plenty)  was  an  old  man  who,  never  having  had 
a  daughter,  was  b^inning  to  feel  anxious  about  his  declining  years,  for,  unlike  the 
other  old  people  around,  he  of  course  had  no  son-in-law  to  care  for  him.  He  therefore 
carved  a  daughter  for  himself  out  of  a  plum  tree,  and  being  a  medicine-man,  so  skil- 
fully did  he  cut  and  carve  the  timber  that  by  the  time  the  task  was  completed  there 
was  indeed  a  woman  lovely  to  gaze  upon.  Her  name  was  TJsi-diu  (lit.,  seed-tree)  and 
her  physical  charms  were  almost,  but,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  not  quite,  perfect. 
So  attractive  was  she  that  aU  the  animals,  bird  and  beast,  came  from  far  to  court 
her,  but  the  old  man  liked  none  of  them,  and  when  they  asked  biTn  for  her  as 
wife  he  gave  them  a  curt  refusal.  The  old  man  had  a  very  poor  opinion  of  the  abilities 
of  these  prospective  sons-in-law.  But  when  Yar,  the  Sun  himself,  stopped  on  his 
journey,  and  paid  the  old  man  a  visit,  it  was  quit*  clear  what  his  purpose  was,  and 
proof  was  not  long  in  coming  that  his  advances  would  meet  with  encouragement. 

30.  Nahakoboni  thought  he  would  try  Yar's  mettle,  and  see  what  stuff  he  was  made 
of.  He  told  Yar  to  feed  him,  and  made  him  fetch  along  all  the  barbecued  meat 
that  he  had  brought  with  him  on  his  journey,  and  had  left  at  the  edge  of  the  bush. 
He  ate  very  heartily,  as  might  have  been  expected  from  the  name  given  him,  leav- 
ing only  a  quarter  of  the  meat  for  his  visitor.  He  next  told  Yar  to  give  him  drink; 
the  latter  emptied  a  big  jugful  down  his  throat.    His  next  order  to  Yar  was  to  bring 


BOTH]  HEfiOES  131 

him  water  to  bathe  with,  and  for  this  purpose  gave  him  a  quake."  But  when  the 
poor  fellow  put  the  quake  into  the  water-hole,  and  pulled  it  out  again,  the  water  of 
course  all  escaped;  he  tried  many  tunes,  but  it  continued  to  escape.  Just  then  he 
heard  a  rushing  sound  proceeding  from  the  bush,  and  there  appeared  a  Hebu ;  when 
the  latter  learned  what  he  was  trying  to  do,  he  offered  his  assistance,  and  made  the 
water  remain  in  the  quake.  The  would-be  bridegroom  carried  it  to  his  prospective 
father-in-law,  and  bathed  him.  The  old  man  then  told  Yar  to  shoot  some  fish  for 
him;  that  he  would  find  the  corial  at  the  waterside,  a  bench  for  it  under  the  roots 
of  a  particular  tree,  and  an  arrow  lying  in  the  shade  of  another.  It  is  true  the  corial 
was  at  the  waterside;  it  was  really  lying  under  water,  and  was  a  very  heaA-j-  one — 
but  the  young  man  managed  to  haul  it  up  at  last,  and  then  bail  it  out.  Proceeding 
to  the  particular  tree  indicated,  and  looking  in  and  among  the  roots  he  was  surprised 
and  frightened  at  seeing  an  alligator  there;  he  held  on  to  its  neck,  and  it  changed 
into  a  bench  which  fitted  the  boat.^  In  the  shade  of  the  other  tree  he  was  similarly 
taken  aback  when  a  big  snake  came  into  Aiew:  he  seized  its  neck,  however,  and  it 
changed  into  a  fish-arrow.  The  old  man  now  joined  him;  they  got  into  the  corial 
and  paddled  down  the  stream.  "I  want  some  kwabaihi'  fish,"  said  the  old  man, 
."but  you  must  not  look  into  the  water.  Shoot  up  into  the  air."  His  companion 
did  as  he  was  told,  and  so  skilful  was  he  with  the  bow  that  the  arrow  pierced  the  fish 
and  killed  it.  So  big  was  the  fish  that  when  hauled  in  it  almost  sunk  the  corial; 
they  managed  to  get  it  home,  however. 

31.  The  old  man  was  now  thoroughly  satisfied  with  Yar's  worth,  and  gave  him  his 
plum-tree  daughter,  Usidiu.  Next  morning  the  young  couple  went  out  hunting  in 
the  bush.*  'When  they  returned  late  in  the  afternoon,  father  and  daughter  had  a 
long  and  earnest  conversation  of  a  private  and  somewhat  delicate  nature,  the  outcome 
of  which  was  that  the  old  man  learnt  for  the  first  time  that  the  masterpiece  upon 
which  he  had  expended  so  much  time,  skill,  and  cunning,  was  not  quite  perfect. 
Her  husband  had  found  fault  with  her.  Huntii^  was  resumed  the  following  day; 
a  private  conversation  was  again  held  in  the  late  afternoon,  the  result  of  which  showed 
clearly  that  the  fault  complained  of  stiU  remained.  The  distracted  father  could 
only  assure  her  that  he  could  do  nothing  further  lo  render  her  acceptable  to  his  son- 
in-law.  'WTien  the  latter  heard  this,  he  consulted  a  bti-nia  bird  (Opistho  comui), 
whom  he  brought  back  with  him  next  day.  While  being  nursed  and  fed  in  the  girl's 
lap,  the  wretched  bird  forcibly  took  a  ven,-  mean  advantage  of  her  innocence,  and 
then  flew  away.  This  outrage  ha\-ing  been  brought  to  the  knowledge  of  the  father, 
he  determined  upon  giving  his  daughter  one  more  trial,  with  the  result  that  he  suc- 
ceeded in  removdng  a-  snake  ex  parte  questa  personse  eius.  The  diflSculty  was  now 
remedied  and  the  young  woman  went  once  more  to  join  her  husband.  The  following 
afternoon,  on  their  return  from  the  usual  hunt,  father  and  daughter  met  again  in 
private  conversation.  Happy  girl! — ^her  husband  was  quite  satisfied  with  her,  having 
no  complaint  whatever  to  make. 

3?.  Xow  although  the  old  man  purposely  e\-inced  no  signs  of  ill-will,  he  was  greatly 
displeased  with  his  son-in-law,  not  only  for  expressing  discontent  with  the  piece 
of  sculpture  when  it  first  came  into  his  possession,  but  also  for  having  allowed  the  bunia 
bird  to  tinker  with  it.  He  bided  his  time,  waiting  for  his  revenge  to  come  when  the 
young  man  should  complete  the  ciistomary  marriage  tasks — the  cutting  of  a  field, 
and  the  building  of  a  house  for  him.  It  was  not  long  before  Yar  commenced  cutting 
the  field:  he  worked  at  it  early,  he  worked  at  it  late,  and  at  last  told  his  wife  to  let 
her  father  know  that  it  was  ready  for  his  inspection.    The  old  man  went  to  have  a 

1  It  would  seem  to  be  an  invariable  practice  with  the  Indians  to  bathe  after  a  meal. 
s  .^  \-ery  common  form  of  house-bench  is  one  in  the  shape  of  this  reptile. 
1  The  name  of  a  big  species  of  luiainanni  (^CichJa  ocdjarij), 

*  Previous  to  the  advent  of  civilizing  influences  among  the  Indians,  the  jus  eonnubii  was  usually 
exercised  daring  the  waldng  hours. 


132  ANIMISM   AND   FOLK-LORE   OF   GXTIANA   INDIANS    [eth.  ann.  30 

look  and  on  hia  return  home  told  Mg  daughter  that  he  found  faxilt  with  it.  The  young 
couple  then  went  oft  to  inspect  the  field  on  their  own  account;  they  were  much  sur- 
prised to  see  all  the  trees  and  bushes  standing  there,  just  as  luxuriant  as  before, 
little  dreaming  that  Nahakoboni  by  means  of  his  "medicine"  had  caused  this  rapid 
growth  to  take  place  only  the  night  before.  Yar  had  therefore  to  cut  another  and  a 
bigger  field,  and  just  the  same  thing  happened  as  before,  the  old  father  again  expressing 
himself  in  terms  of  strong  disapproval.  "How  is  this?  "said  Yar  to  his  wife.  "Ihave 
cut  a  field  twice,  and  yet  the  old  man  is  not  satisfied  with  it. "  She  thereupon  advised 
him  to  cut  a  third  field,  but  on  this  occasion  su^ested,  in  addition,  his  pulling  out 
all  the  stumps  by  their  roofs.  Having  cut  the  third  field,  he  started  pulling  up  the 
stumps;  it  is  true  that  he  started  on  many,  but  he  did  not  succeed  in  pulling  out  one! 
He  fell  down  exhausted.  By  and  by,  his  old  friend  the  Hebii  put  in  an  appearance, 
and  seeing  his  distress,  offered  to  do  the  job  for  him,  advising  him  to  return  home 
at  once  and  to  tell  his  wife  that  the  field  was  now  thoroughly  cleared.  Nahakoboni 
went  next  morning  to  inspect,  and  planted  the  field  with  cassava,  plantains,  and  all 
other  useful  plants;  he  returned  in  the  evening,  but  spake  never  a  word.  This  made 
Yar  suspicious,  so  getting  up  early  the  following  day,  he  was  much  surprised  to  find  in 
place  of  an  empty  field,  a  beautiful  crop  of  ripe  cassava,  plantains,  and  all  the  othet 
good  things  that  his  belly  might  yearn  for.  But  anger  still  rankled  in  the  old  man's 
breast,  so  that  when  his  son-in-law  started  on  and  completed  his  other  marriage 
task,  the  building  of  a  house,  the  old  man  again  found  fault,  pulled  it  down,  and  said 
he  wanted  it  built  stronger.  Yar  accordingly  rebuilt  it  with  purple-heart — ^the  hard- 
est timber  he  cotdd  find.  Nahakoboni,  pleased  at  last,  took  charge  of  the  house, 
and  lived  there. 

33.  Yar,  the  Sun,  was  now  free  to  look  after  his  own  domestic  affairs,  and  being 
well  satisfied  with  his  wife,  they  lived  very,  very  happily  together.  One  day  he  told 
her  he  proposed  taking  a  journey  to  the  westward,  but  that  as  she  was  now  pregnant, 
she  had  better  travel  at  her  leisure;  she  would  not  be  able  to  keep  pace  with  him. 
He  would  start  first,  and  she  must  follow  his  tracks;  she  must  always  take  the  right- 
hajad  track;  he  would  scatter  feathers  on  the  left  so  that  she  could  make  no  mistake. 
Accordingly,  next  morning  when  she  commenced  her  journey,  there  was  no  difficulty 
in  finding  her  way,  by  avoiding  the  feathers,  but  by  and  by  she  arrived  at  a  spot 
where  the  wind  had  blown  them  away,  and  then  the  trouble  began.'  What  was  the 
poor  woman  to  do  now  that  she  had  lost  her  way?  Her  very  motherhood  proved  her 
salvation,  because  her  unborn  babe  began  talking,  and  told  her  which  path  to  follow. 
And  as  she  wandered  on  and  ever  on,  her  child  told  her  to  pluck  the  pretty  flowers 
whose  little  heads  bobbed  here  and  there  over  the  roadway.^  She  had  picked 
some  of  the  red  and  yellow  ones,  when  a  marabunta  (wasp)  happened  to  sting  her 
below  the  waist;  in  trying  to  kill  it  she  missed  the  insect  and  struck  herself.  The 
unborn  baby,  however,  misinterpreted  her  action,  and  thinking  that  it  was  being 
smacked,  became  vexed  and  refused  any  longer  to  show  its  mother  which  direction  to 
pursue.  The  result  was  that  the  poor  woman  got  hopelessly  astray,  and  at  last  more 
dead  than  aUve  found  herself  in  front  of  a  very  large  house  whose  only  occupant  was 
Nanyobo  (lit.  a  big  kind  of  frog),  a  very  old  and  very  big  woman.  Saying  "how  day" 
to  each  other,  the  visitor  was  asked  her  business.  She  was  trying  to  find  her  husband, 
the  Sun,  but  she  had  lost  the  road,  and  she  was  so  very  weary.  Nanyobo,  the  Frog 
therefore  bade  the  woman  welcome,  and  giving  her  to  eat  and  drink  and  telling  her 
to  be  seated,  squatted  on  the  ground  close,  and  asked  her  to  clean  her  host's  head. 
"But  mind,"  continued  the  old  woman,  "don't  put  the  insects  into  your  month, 
because   they  will  poison  you."     Our  wanderer,  however,  overcome  with  fatigue 

1  In  Sect.  BBS  there  is  mentioned  a  connection  between  certain  leathers  and  loss  of  memory. 
'  Dance  (p.  340)  in  connection  with  the  Makusi,  says,  "she  plucked  pretty  leaves  and  flowers  and  placed 
them  in  her  girdle  .  .  .  the  same  as  we  do  now  when  our  pregnant  wives  travel  with  us." 


»°TH]  HEROES  133 

and  anxiety,  forgot  all  about  the  injunction,  and  picking  out  a  louse,  placed  it,  as  is 
customary  with  the  Indians,  between  her  teeth.  But  no  sooner  had  she  done  so, 
than  she  fell  dead.' 

34.  Old  Nanyobo  thereupon  slashed  open  the  mother,  and  extracted  not  one  child, 
but  two;  a  pair  of  beautiful  boys,  Makunaima  and  Pia.  Nanyobo  proved  a  dear,  kind 
foster-mother  and  minded  them  well.  As  the  babieg  grew  larger,  they  commenced 
shooting  birds;  when  still  bi^er  they  went  to  the  waterside  and  shot  fish  and 
game.  On  each  occasion  when  they  shot  fish,  the  old  woman  would  say,  "You  must 
dry  your  fish  in  the  sun,  and  never  over  a  fire;"  but  what  was  curious  was  that  she 
would  invariably  send  them  to  fetch  firewood,  and  by  the  time  that  they  had  returned 
with  it,  there  would  be  the  fish  all  nicely  cooked  and  ready  for  them.  As  a  matter 
of  fact,  she  would  vomit  fire  out  of  her  mouth,  do  her  cooking,  and  lick  the  fire  up 
again  before  the  lads'  return;  she  apparently  never  had  a  fire  burning  for  them  to  see.' 
The  repetition  of  this  sort  of  thing  day  after  day  made  the  boys  suspicious;  they  could 
not  understand  how  the  old  lady  made  her  fire,  and  accordingly  determined  to  find 
out.  On  the  next  occasion  that  they  were  despatched  to  bring  firewood,  one  of 
them,  when  at  a  safe  distance  from  the  house,  changed  himself  into  a  lizard,  and 
turning  back,  ran  up  into  the  roof  whence  he  could  get  a  good  view  of  everything 
that  was  going  on.  What  did  he  see?  He  not  only  saw  the  old  woman  vomit  out  fire, 
use  it,  and  lick  it  up  again,  but  he  watched  her  scratch  her  neck,  whence  flowed 
something  like  balata  (Mimiisops  halata)  milk,  out  of  which  she  prepared  starch. 
SuflBciently  satisfied  with  what  he  had  witnessed,  he  came  down,  and  ran  after  his 
brother.  They  discussed  the  matter  carefully,  the  result  of  their  deliberations  being 
summarized  in  the  somewhat  terse  expression,  "What  old  woman  do,  no  good.  Kill 
old  woman."  This  sentiment  was  carried  into  execution.  Clearing  a  large  field, 
they  left  in  its  very  center  a  fine  tree,  to  which  they  tied  her;  then,  surrounding  her 
on  all  sides  with  stacks  of  timber,  the  boys  set  them  on  fire.  As  the  old  woman 
gradually  became  consumed,  the  fire  which  used  to  be  within  her  passed  into  the  sur- 
rounding fagots.  These  fagots  happened  to  be  hima-heru  wood,  and  whenevrr  we 
rub  together  two  sticks  of  this  same  timber  we  can  get  fire. 

35.  The  Carib  version  of  the  tradition  is  noteworthy  mainly  in 
that  the  Hero  ultimately  finds  a  place  among  the  stars. 

The  Sun,  the  Frog,  axd  the  Firesticks  (C) 

A  long  time  ago,  there  was  a  woman  who  had  become  pregnant  by  the  Sun,  with 
twin  children,  Pia  and  Makunaima.  One  day  the  as-yet-unbom  Pia  said  to  his 
mother:  "  Let  us  go  and  see  our  father.  We  will  show  you  the  way,  and  as  you  travel 
along  pick  for  us  any  pretty  flowers  that  you  may  come  across."  She  accordingly 
went  westward  to  meet  her  husband,  and  plucking  flowers  here  and  there  on  the 
pathway,  accidentally  stumbled,  fell  doivn,  and  hurt  herself;  she  blamed  her  two 
unborn  children  as  the  cause.'  They  became  vexed  at  this,  and  when  she  next 
asked  them  which  road  she  was  to  follow,  they  refused  to  tell  her,  and  thus  it  was 
that  she  took  the  wrong  direction,  and  finally  arrived,  foot-sore  and  weary,  at  a  curious 
house.  This  belonged  to  Tiger's  mother,  Kono(bo)-aru,  the  Rain-frog,  and  when 
the  exhausted  traveler  discovered  where  she  was,  she  told  the  old  woman  she  was 
very  sorry  she  had  come,  because  she  had  often  heard  how  cruel  her  son  was.     But 

'  For  further  reference  to  head-lice  in  legendary  lore,  see  PE,  78,  82. 

s  I  find  it  to  be  well  known  among  the  Indians  that  certain  kinds  of  frogs,  after  dark,  can  be  made  to 
swallow  glowiog  embers,  which  are  then  probably  mistaken  for  various  luminous  insects. — W.  E.  R. 

» When  I  suggested  to  the  narrator  that  the  woman  went  eastward  to  meet  the  sun,  he  emphatically 
contradicted  me,  explaining  that  she  went  to  meet  him  where  he  would  fall  to  the  earth  again,  at  the 
distant  horizon.— W.  E.  R. 


134  ANIMISM   AND   FOLK-LORE   OF   GUIANA   INDIANS   [eth.-ann.  SC 

the  house-mistress  took  pity  on.  her,  and  telling  her  not  to  be  afraid,  hid  her  in  the  big 
cassiri  jar,  and  popped  on  the  cover.  When  Tiger  got  home  that  night,  he  sniffed 
up  and  down,  and  said,  "Mother,  I  can  smell  somebody!  Whom  have  you  here?" 
And  though  she  denied  having  anybody  on  the  premises,  Tiger  was  not  satisfied,  but 
had  a  good  look  round  on  his  own  account,  and  peeping  into  the  cassiri  jar,  discovered 
the  frightened  creature. 

36.  On  kUling  the  poor  woman.  Tiger  found  the  two  as-yet-unbom  children,  and 
showed  them  to  his  mother,  who  said  that  he  must  now  mind  and  cherish  them.  So 
he  put  them  in  a  bundle  of  cotton  to  keep  them  warm,  and  noticed  next  morning  that 
they  had  already  begun  to  creep.  The  next  day,  they  had  grown  much  bigger,  and 
with  this  daily  increase  in  about  a  month's  time  they  had  reached  man's  size.  Tiger's 
mother  told  them  that  they  were  now  fit  to  use  the  bow  and  arrow,  with  which  they 
must  go  and  shoot  the  Powis  (Crax)  because  it  was  this  bird  which  had  kUled  their 
own  mother.  Pia  and  Makunaima  therefore  went  next  day  and  shot  Powis,  and  these 
birds  they  continued  shooting  day  after  day.  When  they  were  about  to  let  fly  the 
arrow  at  the  last  bird,  the  Powis  told  them  that  it  was  none  of  hia  tribe  who  had  killed 
their  mother,  but  Tiger  himself,  giving  them  both  full  particulars  as  to  how  he  had 
encompassed  her  death.  The  two  boys  were  very  angry  on  hearing  this,  spared  the 
bird,  and  coming  home  empty-handed,  informed  the  old  woman  that  the  Powis  had 
taken  their  arrows  away  from  them.  Of  course  this  was  not  true,  but  only  an  excuse; 
they  had  themselves  hidden  their  arrows  in  the  bush,  and  wanted  the  chance  of  mak- 
ing new  and  stronger  weapons.  These  completed,  they  built  a  staging  up  against  a 
tree,  and  when  Tiger  passed  below,  they  shot  and  killed  him.  And  when  they  reached 
home,  they  slaughtered  his  mother  also. 

37.  The  two  lads  now  proceeded  on  their  way  and  arrived  at  last  at  a  clump  of 
cotton-trees  in  the  center  of  which  was  a  house  occupied  by  a  very  old  woman,  really 
a  frog,  and  with  her  they  took  up  their  quarters.  They  went  out  hunting  each  day,  and 
on  their  return  invariably  found  some  cassava  that  their  hostess  had  baked.  "  That's 
very  strange,"  remarked  Pia  to  his  brother,  "there  is  no  field  anywhere  about,  and 
yet  look  at  the  quantity, of  cassava  which  the  old  woman  gives  us.  We  must  watch 
her. ' '  So  next  moning,  instead  of  going  into  the  forest  to  hunt,  they  went  only  a  little 
distance  away,  and  hid  themselves  behind  a  tree  whence  they  could  see  everything 
that  took  place  at  the  house.  They  noticed  that  the  old  frog  had  a  white  spot  on  her 
shoulders:  they  saw  her  bend  down  and  pick  at  this  spot,  and  observed  the  cassava- 
starch  fall.  On  their  return  home  they  refused  to  eat  the  usual  cake,  having  now 
discovered  its  source.  Next  morning  they  picked  a  quantity  of  cotton  from  the 
neighboring  trees,  and  teased  it  out  on  the  floor.  When  the  old  woman  asked  what 
they  were  doing,  they  told  her  that  they  were  making  something  nice  and  soft  for  her 
to  lie  upon.  Much  pleased  at  this,  she  promptly  sat  upon  it,  but  no  sooner  had  she 
done  so  than  the  two  lads  set  fire  to  it;  thereupon  her  skin  was  scorched  so  dreadfully 
as  to  give  it  the  wrinkled  and  rough  appearance  which  it  now  bears. 

38.  Pia  and  Makunaima  next  continued  their  travels  to  meet  their  father,  and 
soon  arrived  at  the  house  of  a  Maipuri  (tapir),  where  they  spent  three  days.  On 
the  third  evening  Maipuri  returned,  looking  very  sleek  and  fat.  Wanting  to  know 
what  she  had  been  feeding  on,  the  boys  followed  her  tracks,  which  they  traced  to 
a  plum-tree;  this  they  shook  and  shook  so  violently  as  to  make  all  the  fruit,  both 
ripe  and  unripe,  fall  to  the  ground,  where  it  remained  scattered.  When  Maipuri 
next  morning  went  to  feed,  she  was  disgusted  to  see  all  her  food  thus  wasted,  and 
in  a  very  ai^y  mood  quickly  returned  home,  beat  both  boys,  and  cleared  out  into 
the  bush.  The  boys  started  in  pursuit,  tracked  her  for  many  a  long  day,  and  at 
last  caught  up  with  her.  Pia  now  told  Makunaima  to  wheel  round  in  front  and 
drive  the  creatvire  back  to  him,  and  as  she  passed,  let  fly  a  harpoon-arrow  into  her; 
the  rope,  however,  got  in  the  way  of  Makvmaima  as  he  was  passh^  in  front,  and 


noTH]  HEEOES  135 

cut  his  leg  off.  On  a  clear  night  you  can  still  see  them  up  among  the  clouds:  there 
isMaipuri  (Hyades),  there  Makunaima  (Pleiades),  and  below  is  his  severed  leg  (Orion's 
Belt).     [Cf.  Sect.  211.] 

39.  In  the  story  as  told  by  a  Makusi  (Da,  339),  there  are  but  a 
few  main  variations  from  the  particulars  given  by  the  Warraus 
(Sect.  29).    These  variations  are  as  follows: 

The  Sun,  finding  his  fish-ponds  too  frequently  robbed,  set  Yamimi,  the  water- 
lizard,  to  watch  them.  Yamuru,  not  being  sufficiently  vigilant  and  deprivations 
continuing,  Alligator  was  appointed  watchman.  Alligator,  the  depredator,  con- 
tinued his  old  trade  while  employed  as  a  watchman,  and  at  last  was  detected  by 
the  Sun,  who  slashed  him  with  a  cutlass  within  an  inch  of  his  life,  every  cut  form- 
ing a  scale  (Sect.  141).  Alligator  begged  piteously  for  his  life,  and  to  propitiate  the 
Sun  offered  him  his  beautiful  daughter  in  marriage.  But  he  had  no  daughter.  He 
therefore  sculptured  the  form  of  a  woman  from  a  wild  plum  tree.  He  then  exposed 
her  to  the  Sun's  influence,  and  fearing  ultimate  detection  of  the  fraud,  hid  himself 
in  the  water,  peering  at  the  Sun;  and  this  habit  Alligator  has  continued  to  the 
present  time.  The  woman  was  .imperfectly  formed,  but  a  woodpecker,  in  quest 
of  food,  pecked  at  her  body  atque  genitalia  preparavit.  The  Sun  left  her  and  she, 
grieving  for  his  desertion,  said  that  she  would  seek  him.  [Then  follows  the  incident 
of  her  advent  at  old  Mother  Toad's  house,  the  sickness  caused  by  eating  the  poi- 
sonous head-lice,  the  death  of  the  woman,  as  in  the  Carib  version,  caused  by  Tiger, 
and  the  discovery  of  the  two  unborn  children,  who  subsequently  became  the  two 
Heroes.  1 

40.  Pia's  first  work  was  to  slay  Tiger  and  take  out  of  his  carcass  the  parts  of  the 
body  of  his  mother,  who  became  whole  and  alive.  [Next  comes  a  repetition 
of  the  Warrau  legend  concerning  the  old  toad  guarding  her  fire-making  secret.] 
But  Makunaima  had  an  appetite  for  fire-eating,  and  invariably  devoured  the  live 
coals.  The  toad  remonstrated,  and  Makunaima  in  anger  prepared  to  leave  and 
to  travel  throughout  the  land.  To  attain  his  purpose  he  dug  a  large  canal,  into 
which  flowed  water;  and  having  made  a  corial,  the  first  of  its  kind,  he  persuaded  his 
mother  and  Pia  to  go  with  him.  It  was  from  Crane  that  the  brothers  learned  the 
art  of  fire-making  when  he  struck  his  bill  against  a  flint  and  the  friction  produced 
fire.  The  brothers  placed  huge  rocks  in  all  the  rivers  to  detain  the  fishes:  the  rocks 
thus  placed  caused  the  great  waterfalls.  Crane  was  at  first  accustomed  to  catch  his 
own  fish,  but  finding  Pia  and  Makunaima  more  successful  fishermen  after  the  rivers 
had'  been  dammed,  kept  near  to  them  and  took  away  their  fish.  Pia  consequently 
quarreled  with  Crane,  who,  becoming  angry,  took  up  Makunaima  (who  had  taken 
part  with  him  against  his  brother)  and  flew  away  with  him  to  Spanish  Guiana.) 

41.  Pia  and  his  mother,  thus  deserted,  continued  their  daily  employment  of  travel- 
ing together,  fishing,  and  seeking  fruits.  But  at  last  one  day  the  mother  complained 
of  weariness  and  Pia  conveyed  her  to  the  heights  of  Eoraima,  these  to  be  her 
abiding  place  of  rest.  Then  came  a  change  of  occupation  for  Pia.  He  abandoned 
the  hunt  as  the  sole  or  principal  occupation  of  his  life,  and  traveled  from  place  to 
place,  teaching  the  Indians  many  useful  and  good  things.  By  him  and  his  teachings 
we  have  the  Piai  men.  Thus  did  Pia  piusue  his  course  of  benevolence  until  he 
disappeared  finally  from  men  and  remained  awhile  with  his  mother  on  Roraima. 
And  when  his  time  of  departure  from  her  had  arrived,  he  told  her  that  whatever  of 
good  she  desired  she  would  obtain  if  she  would  bow  her  head  and  cover  her  face 
with  her  hands  (Sect.  iS6)  while  she  expressed  her  wish.  This  she  does  in  her  need 
to  the  present  hour,  ^^^lenever  the  mother  of  these  two  heroes  of  our  race  is  sorrow- 
ful, there  arises  a  storm  on  the  mountain,  and  it  is  her  tears  that  run  down  in  streams 
from  the  heights  of  Roraima  (Da,  342). 


136  ANIMISM   AND   FOLK-LOBE   OF   GUIANA   INDIANS    [eth.  ann.  30 

Mount  Zabang,  the  Olympus  of  the  Makusis,  is  the  dwelling  of 
their  great  Spirit  Makunaima  (ScR,  ii,  188). 

43.  Amalivaca  (Sect.  2),  venerated  by  the  Caribs  and  more 
especially  by  the  Tamanacs,  is  said  to  have  arrived  in  a  bark,  during 
the  subsidence  of  the  great  waters,  and  carved  the  sculptures  now 
seen  high  on  the  perpendicular  faces  of  the  rocks  which  border  the 
great  rivers  (Br,  387).  He  has  a  brother  Vochi^^together,  they 
created  the  world.  While  making  the  Orinoco  they  had  a  long  con- 
sultation about  causing  the  stream  to  flow  up  and  down  at  one  and 
the  same  time,  so  as  to  ease  the  paddlers  as  much  as  possible.  Amali- 
vaca had  daughters  who  were  very  fond  of  gadding  about,  so  he 
broke  their  legs  to  render  them  sedentary,  and  force  them  to  people 
the  land  of  the  Tamanacs.  He  also  did  many  other  things.  He 
made  the  earth  sufficiently  level  for  people  to  dwell  on.  He  seems 
to  have  known  music.  His  house,  consisting  of  some  blocks  of 
stone  piled  one  on  another,  forming  a  sort  of  cavern,  may  stiU  be 
seen  on  the  plains  of  Maita,  and  near  it  is  a  large  stone  which  the 
Indians  say  "was  an  instrument  of  music,  the  drum  of  Amalivaca" 
(AVH,  rr,  473).  Strange  to  say,  I  can  obtain  no  information  at 
first-hand  from  the  Pomeroon  District  Caribs  concerning  this 
Amalivaca;  even  the  name  appears  to  be  now  unknown  here. 


Chapter  III 
TRACES  OF  SPIRIT,  IDOL,  AND  FETISH  CULT 

Evidence  very  scarce,  but  recognizable  in  Familiar  Spirits,  and  in  the  kickshaws 
of  the  Medicine-man  (4-j);  Dancing  with  noisy  instruments  in  front  of  Idols  (44); 
the  Sacred  Trumpets  or  Flutes  (-45);  Frogs  and  Toads  as  divinities  (46);  Snakes  (47). 
On  the  Amazons:  Idols  (4S);  Other  objects,  of  obscure  signification,  recorded  from 
within  (49)  and  without  (50)  the  Guianas,  can  hardly  be  regarded  as  Idols  or  Fetishes. 

43.  It  must  be  admitted  that  the  positive  evidence  of  idol  or 
fetish  worship  among  the  Guiana  Indians  is  very  scarce,  even  Schom- 
burgk  recording  (ScR,  n,  321)  that  he  never  found  the  slightest  trace 
of  idolatry  or  of  supplication  to  a  fetish.  And  yet.  La  view  of  the 
historical  records  that  the  people  living  to  the  north,  the  west,  and 
the  south  of  them,  did  certainly  have  something  akin  to  an  idol  or 
fetish  cult  leads  one  to  the  belief  that  the  Guiana  natives,  at  some 
not  very  remote  period  of  their  history,  may  possibly  have  pursued 
similar  practices.  Their  northern  neighbors,  Uving  on  the  islands, 
apparently  worshiped  Cemi,  or  so-called  famihar  spirits,  a  cult  still 
traceable,  as  I  propose  showing  (Sect.  93),  ha.  certain  kickshaws  of 
the  mainland  medicine-man. 

44.  Among  their  western  tribesmen  a  religious  rite  performed  by 
some  of  the  Orinoco  tribes  "  was  that  of  dancing  to  the  sound  of  very 
noisy  instruments,  before  two  small  idols,  to  which  they  paid  rever- 
ence by  chanting  extemporaneous  couplets"  (FD,  52). 

45.  This  reference  to  noisy  instruments  suggests  the  sacred  trumpet, 
or  botuto,  which  was  an  object  of  veneration  on  the  upper  reaches  of 
the  Orinoco,  the  Atabapo,  and  the  Inirida.  It  was  sounded  under 
the  palm  trees  that  they  might  bear  abundance  of  fruit.  Humboldt 
says  that,  to  be  initiated  into  the  mysteries  of  the  botuto,  it  is  requi- 
site to  be  of  pure  morals  and  to  have  Mved  single.  The  initiated  are 
subjected  to  flagellations,  fastings,  and  other  painful  exercises.  There 
is  but  a  small  number  of  these  sacred  trumpets.  The  most  ancienth' 
celebrated  is  that  upon  a  hill  near  the  confluence  of  the  Tomo  and  the 
Guainia.  Father  Cereso  assured  us,  continues  the  celebrated  traveler, 
that  the  Indians  speak  of  the  Botuto  of  Tomo  as  an  object  of  worship 
common  to  many  surrounding  tribes.  Fruit  and  intoxicating  liquor 
are  placed  beside  the  sacred  trumpet.  Sometimes  the  Great  Spirit 
himself  makes  the  botuto  resound;  sometimes  he  is  content  to  mani- 
fest his  wiU  through  him  to  whom  the  keeping  of  the  instrument  is 
entrusted.  "Women  are  not  permitted  to  see  this  marvelous  instru- 
ment, and  are  excluded  from  all  the  ceremonies  of  this  worship" 

(AVH,  n,  363),  at  the  risk  of  life. 

'     '  137 


138  ANIMISM   AND   FOLK-LOEB   OF   GUIANA   INDIANS    [eth.  ann.  30 

Wallace  (348)  also  refers  to  similar  instruments  among  the  Uaupes 
River  Indians,  upper  Rio  Negro,  wMch  are  used  at  their  festivals  to 
produce  the  Jurupari,  or  Forest-Spirit,  music.     He  says  that — 

Ttese  iostruments,  however,  are  with  them  such  a  mystery  that  no  woman  must 
ever  see  them ,  on  pain  of  death.  They  are  always  iept  in  some  igaripe'  [water-channel] 
at  a  distance  from  the  malocca,  whence  they  are  brought  on  particular  occasions: 
when  the  sound  of  them  is  heard  approaching,  every  woman  retires  into  the  woods, 
or  into  some  adjoining  shed  which  they  generally  have  near,  and  remains  invisible 
till  after  the  ceremony  is  over,  when  the  instruments  are  taken  away  to  their  hiding- 
place,  and  the  women  come  out  of  their  concealment.  Should  any  female  be  sup- 
posed to  have  seen  them,  either  by  accident  or  design,  she  is  invariably  executed, 
generally  by  poison,  and  a  father  will  not  hesitate  to  sacrifice  his  daughter,  or  a  hus- 
band his  wife,  on  such  an  occasion. 

Koch-Griinberg  (i,  186-187)  speaks  of  these  "Devil"  flutes  on  the 
Aiary  River  (Rio  Negro)  among  the  Siusi,  an  Arawak  tribe.  He  says 
that  these  are  sounded  in  honor  of  Ko-ai,  the  son  of  Yaperi'kuli,  their 
tribal  Hero;  that  the  festival  at  which  they  are  used  is  held  at 
the  time  of  ripening  of  the  fruit  of  the  manicole  {Euterpe  oleracea) 
and  turn  ((Enocarpus  hacaba);  that  on  the  same  occasion  there  is 
mutual  flagellation  with  whips.  The  flutes  have  to  be  carefully 
guarded  from  the  gaze  of  women,  and  when  not  in  use  are  hidden 
under  water,  etc.  They  take  their  name  from  that  of  the  spirit  in 
whose  honor  they  are  sounded.  Elsewhere  (KG,  i,  314-316)  he 
speaks  of  the  dance  as  having  magic  powers;  it  can  dispel  sickness 
and  even  heal  big  wounds.  Granted  that  the  whipping  is  part  and 
parcel  of  the  festival,  and  the  object  of  the  festival  is  to  ensure 
abundance  of  fruit)  the  following  extract  from  Gumilla  is  worth  con- 
sideration: When  the  time  arrives  for  clearing  the  open  plains  with 
a  view  to  sowing  their  corn,  yucca,  plantains,  etc.,  they  [the  SaHvas] 
place  the  young  men,  some  separated  from  the  others,  in  lines,  and  a 
certain  number  of  old  men  provide  themselves  with  whips  and  rough 
thongs  made  of  twisted  agave  (pita).  As  soon  as  intimation  is  given 
that  it  is  time  to  commence  work,  the  whipping  of  these  young  men 
takes  place,  and  notwithstanding  the  cuts  and  marks  which  their 
bodies  receive,  neither  grban  nor  complaint  escapes  them  (G,  i,  188). 
It  is  true  that  the  missionary  was  told  that  they  received  the  whip- 
ping to  cure  them  of  their  laziaess,  but  I  am  strongly  iaclined  to  the 
view,  corroborated  as  it  is  by  the  examples  already  given,  that  the 
flagellation  is  a  propitiation  for  favors  already  received  or  expected, 
that  the  object  of  the  whole  festival  in  fact  is  comparable  with  that 
met  with  in  connection  with  the  cassava  plant  (Sects.  166, 166).  The 
flagellations  inflicted  at  the  burial  ceremonies  (Sect.  75)  would  seem 
to  have  a  different  origin. 

46.  "Some  other  tribes  of  Indians,  who  likewise  dwelt  upon  the 
banks  of  the  river  Oronoka,  paid  to  toads  the  honours  due  to  the 
divinity  [Sect.  Sj^].     Far  from  injuring  these  animals,  they  carefully 


BOTH]  TEACES    OF   SPIEIT,   IDOL,   AND   FETISH   CULT  139 

kept  them  under  pots,  in  order  to  obtain  rain  or  fine  weather;  and 
so  fully  persuaded  were  they  of  their  power  in  this  respect,  that  they 
scourged  them  as  often  as  their  petitions  were  not  answered. "  (FD, 
52.)  It  is  known  that  for  the  Chaimas,  Cumanagotos,  Tamanacs,  and 
other  original  tribes  of  the  Caribs,  the  frog  was  the  god  of  the  waters 
(cf.  Sect.  18):  Ruiz  Blanco  (Conversion  de  Piritu)  says  that  the 
Cumanagotos  never  killed  a  frog,  but  kept  one  like  a  domestic  animal, 
beating  it  when  the  rain  did  not  fall  (AR,  185).  There  is  an  intimate 
connection  between  frogs,  toads,  and  certain  other  animals,  and  suc- 
cess in  the  chase  (Sect.  849) . 

47.  Beyond  the  mention  of  certain  snake  dances,  I  can  find  nothing 
akin  to  actual  worship  and  similar  ceremonies  in  connection  with 
these  creatures,  notwithstanding  the  very  deep-rooted  belief  in  the 
relationship  of  the  serpent  to  sexual  matters  (Sect.  347)  ■  At  Maroa, 
River  Guainia" (upper  Rio  Negro),  Humboldt  (ii,  386)  talks  of  "that 
ancient  dance  of  serpents,  the  Queti,  in  which  these  wily  animals  are 
represented  as  issuing  from  the  forests,  and  coming  to  drink  with  the 
men  in  order  to  deceive  them,  and  carry  off  the  women."  So  also 
Wallace  (204)  records  in  connection  with  a  snake  dance  among  the 
Uaupes  River  Indians,  participated  in  by  men  and  boys,  "two  huge 
artificial  snakes  of  twigs  and  bushes  bound  together  with  sip6s,  from 
thirty  to  forty  feet  long,  and  about  a  foot  in  diameter.  .  .  .  They 
divided  themselves  into  two  parties  of  twelve  or  fifteen  each,  and 
Hfting  the  snakes  on  their  shoulders,  began  dancing." 

48.  South  of  the  Guianas,  there  is  the  evidence  of  Acuna  (92)  from 
the  Amazons,  in  1 639 : 

The  Keligion  of  these  barbarous  People  is  much  alike:  they  all  worship  Idols  which 
they  make  with  their  own  hands;  to  one  of  them  they  ascribe  the  authority  of  govern- 
ing the  waters,  and  put  a  fish  in  his  hand  in  token  of  his  power;  they  choose  others 
to  preside  over  their  seed  time,  and  others  to  inspire  them  with  courage  in  their  Battles; 
they  say  these  gods  came  down  from  Heaven  on  purpose  to  dwell  with  them  and  to 
show  them  kindness.  They  do  not  signify  their  Adoration  of  these  Idols  by  any  out- 
ward ceremonies,  but  on  the  contrary  seem  to  have  forgotten  them  as  soon  as  they  have 
made  them,  and  putting  them  in  a  case  let  them  lie,  without  taking  any  notice  of 
them  so  long  as  they  imagine  they  have  no  occasion  for  their  Help;  but  when  they 
are  ready  to  march  out  to  war,  they  set  up. the  Idol  in  which  they  have  placed  the 
hopes  of  their  Victories,  at  the  Prow  of  their  Canoes  (Cf.  Sect.  84)-  so,  when  they  go  a 
fisliing,  they  take  that  Idol  with  them  to  which  they  attribute  the  government  of  the 
waters. 

49.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  a  few  accounts  of  the  existence 
of  various  cult  objects,  the  actual  signification  of  which  has  so  far 
not  been  satisfactorily  explained;  lest  these  should  ever  be  claimed 
as  examples  of  a  fetish  cult,  it  would  be  weU  to  mention  them  here. 
In  the  Catalogue  of  Contributions  transmitted  from  British  Guiana 
to  the  London  International  Exhibition  of  1862  there  is  a  record 
(p.  52)  of  "Figures  of  Clay,  made  by  an  Indian  of  the  Caribisi  tribe, 


140  ANIMISM   AND   FOLK-LOEE   OF   GUIANA   INDIANS    [eth.  ANN.  30 

and  representing  human  beings  and  an  armadillo.  From  Massaruni 
River.  Contributed  by  H.  C.  Whitlock  and  Geo.  Dennis.  These 
are  the  only  specimens  of  Indian  plastic  art  ever  seen  by  the  Contribu- 
tors." I  myself  have  obtained  children's  whistles  ia  the  shape  of 
frogs  and  turtles  made  of  clay  by  the  Monica  River  Caribs.  Among 
the  Caribs  of  the  Parou  River,  French  Guiana,  Cr^vaux  (262)  speaks 
of  meeting  with  a  young  woman  who  was,  modeling  a  tapir  in  black 
wax.  From  the  upper  Aiary  (Rio  Negro)  Koch-Grunberg  (i,  125) 
figures  several  wax  objects  modeled  by  little  boys,  and  wooden  fishes 
employed  in  the  death  ceremonies  (KG,  ii,  154).  In  our  own  colony, 
Schomburgk  states  (ScR,  n,  471)  that  at  a  Maopityan  settlement, 
under  the  cone-shaped  shelter  raised  on  top  of  the  giant  huts, 
were  several  flat  pieces  of  wood,  cut  into  all  kinds  of  figures, 
which  swayed  to  and  fro  with  the  wind.  Among  the  Monikos  and 
Sokorikos,  branches  of  the  Carib  race  inhabiting  the  districts  on  both 
sides  of  the  Cotinga,  "a  very  marked  feature  in  all  their  houses," 
says  J.  J.  Quelch  (Ti,  1895,  pp.  144-5),  "are  the  rude  imitations  of 
birds,  chiefly  of  the  herons,  the  negrocop  [Mycteria],  the  muscovy 
duck,  and  the  swallow-tailed  hawk,  which  are  made  from  cotton 
thread,  corn-cobs  and  sticks,  and  are  suspended  high  up  under  the 
roofs  of  the  houses,  in  the  positions  occupied  during  flight."  These 
are  probably  identical  with  the  targets  met  with  on  the  Aiary  River 
(Rio  Negro).  Targets  of  artificial  birds,  made  of  maize-cobs  and  their 
coverings,  hang  as  decorations  from  the  crossbeams  of  the  houses: 
the  boys  blow  at  them  with  nonpoisoned  arrows  (KG,  i,  102;  u,  244). 
50.  Outside  of  the  Guianas  to  the  westward,  among  the  Carijonas 
of  the  upper  Yapura,  Crevaux  (361)  speaks  of  a  bench  with  rough 
carvings  representing  a  bird  of  prey;  also  of  the  wooden  figure  of  a 
man  with  legs  wide  apart.  To  the  southward,  Acuna  (142)  makes 
mention  of  the  Capunas  and  Zurinas  on  the  south  side  of  the  Ajna- 
zon,  near  its  junction  with  the  Rio  Negro : 

They  will  cut  a  raised  figure  so  muci  to  the  life  and  so  exactly  upon  any  coarse 
piece  of  wood  that  many  of  our  Carvers  might  take  pattern  by  them.  It  ia  not  only 
to  gratify  their  own  fancies,  and  for  their  own  use  that  they  make  these  pieces  of  work 
but  also  for  the  Profit  it  brings  them:  for  they  hereby  maintain  a  trade  with  their 
neighbours,  and  truck  their  work  with  them  for  any  necessaries  to  serve  their  occasion. 


chaptek  rv 

CREATION  OF  MAX,  PLANTS,  AND  AXIilALS 

Man  was  either  brought  here  from  Cloud-land,  etc.  (51),  or  waa  created  here  {5i); 
in  the  latter  case,  from  Animals,  as  Tigers  (55),  Snakes  {54-66),  from  Plants  (57),  or 
from  Rocks  and  Stones  {58), 

Ceitain  Plants  were  derived  from  human  beings  or  Bush  Spirits  (59),  or  grew  upon 
a  Wonderful  Tree  {60-61).    Some  animals  arose  from  the  Spirits  of  Mortal  Men  {6^). 

51.  Certain  tribes  believe  that  man,  already  made,  reached  this 
world  from  elsewhere,  while  others  claim  that  he  developed  here, 
where  he  either  merely  grew  into  being  or  was  indebted  to  some 
Master  Spirit  for  coming  into  existence  at  all.  His  presence  on  the 
planet,  however,  would  not  seem  to  give  rise  on  his  part  to  claims 
superior  to  those  of  various  animals,  including  birds. 

In  those  cases  where  Man,  already  created,  reached  this  "vale  of 
tears"  from  elsewhere,  his  place  of  origin  appears  to  have  been  Cloud- 
land,  the  Skies,  and  countries  beyond  them,  according  to  views  held 
by  Caribs,  Arawaks,  and  Warraus. 

The  first-mentioned  hold  that  mankind  descended  from  on  high  .  .  . 
unfortunately,  the  clouds  which  had  brought  them  down  receded 
and  so  left  them  behind.  Being  hungry,  they  were  forced  to  eat 
earth,  which  they  baked  into  cakes,  and  followed  the  beasts  and  birds 
to  see  what  wild  fruits  they  were  accustomed  to  devoiu",  and  so  learned 
to  help  themselves  (BrB,  103).  According  to  the  Island  Caribs, 
"Louquo  was  the  first  man  and  a  Carib.  He  was  not  made  of  any 
other  body;  he  descended  from  the  sky  and  Uved  a  long  time  on 
earth;"  in  fact  it  was  he  who  made  it.  "He  had  a  large  nostril 
from  which,  as  also  from  an  incision  in  his  thighs,  he  produced  the 
first  men  (BBR,  226-7).  Bolingbroke  talks  of  Longwo  as  being  the 
first  man,  in  the  Indian  beUef  of  the  "central  parts"  of  Guiana: 
"Certain  vapors,  or  spirits,  to  which  the  savages  ascribe  thunders 
and  fevers,  are  the  objects  of  theirfear  and  propitiatory  worship.  They 
do  not  ascribe  a  human  form  to  these  divinities,  but  conceive  them 
to  have  brought  hither  the  first  man,  whom  they  call  Longwo  "  (Bol, 
371).  The  Korobohdna,  one  of  the  many  group-divisions  of  the 
Arawaks  .  .  .  believe  that  they  originaUy  came  from  above  the  clouds. 
The  weight  of  a  heavy  woman  broke  the  rope  by  which  they  were 
descending:  and  communication  was  thus  cut  off  between  those  who 
had  reached  the  ground  and  those  remaining  above.  The  Great 
Spirit,  pitying  the  latter,  supplied  them  \\-ith  wings  and  plumage; 
and  they  came  down  to  colonize  the  trees  above  the  heads  of  their 

141 


142  ANIMISM   AND   FOLK-LOEE   OF   GUIANA   INDIANS    [eth.  ann.  30 

brethren — still  privileged  to  live  near,  and  to  converse  with  them, 
though  changed  into  kuriaka  parrots  (BrB,  179). 

The  Warrau  version  of  their  own  origih is  very  similar.  Okonor6t6 
one  day  went  hunting  for  a  rare  bird — ^in  those-  times  the  Warraus 
hved  up  above  the  sky  and  the  only  creatures  they  knew  of  were 
birds — and  it  was  many  a  long  day  before  he  succeeded  in  locating 
it,  though  he  did  so  at  last.  Letting  fly  an  arrow  he  transfixed  it, 
but  on  rushing  up  to  the  place  where  it  had  fallen,  there  was  nothing 
visible  but  a  big  hole  in  the  ground  through  which  he  could  see  the 
deer,  peccary,  and  other  animals  disporting  themselves  on  the  green 
plains  below.  With  the  help  of  a  cotton  rope  he  descended  to  earth, 
and  saw  jaguars,  snakes,  and  wild  beasts  devouring  their  prey-  He 
shot  a  young  deer,  cooked  the  flesh,  and  finding  how  sweet  it  tasted, 
took  some  of  the  flesh  back  with  him  on  his  ascent  up  the  rope,  home 
again.  Needless  to  say,  all  the  Warraus  were  only  too  eager  to 
accompany  him  when  he  repeated  his  descent,  which  they  did  in 
safety,  one  after  the  other  uniU  the  very  last — and  this  happened 
to  be  a  woman  who  got  wedged  in  the  aperture,  and  could  neither 
get  up  nor  down.  The  hole  being  thus  filled  up,  the  Warraus  have 
never  been  able  to  reach  their  old  honae  again  (BrB,  55).  The  name 
of  this  woman  who  thus  stuck  half-way  is  Okona-kura,  the  Warraus 
still  recognizing  her  as  the  Morning  Star. 

Certain  of  the  Salivas  did  not  hesitate  to  proclaim  themselves 
children  of  the  Sun  (G,  i,  113). 

52.  In  those  cases  where  man,  as  such,  put  in  his  first  appearance  on 
this  world's  stage  (i.  e.,  as  in  many  other  places  was  created  on  the 
earth)  there  is  no  evidence  available  pointing  to  the  existence  of  any 
beUef  that  his  creation  took  place  out  of  nothing,  either  spontane- 
ously or  at  the  instance  of  some  Master  Spirit,  or  some  person,  or  thing. 
Indeed,  the  two  or  three  examples  which  might  be  claimed  in  support  of 
the  existence  of  such  evidence  are  very  dubious.  Schomburgk  notes  an 
Arawak  tradition,  which  I  can  not  find  elsewhere,  that  man  was  created 
by  Kururumanni,  and  woman  by  Kulimina  (Sect.  19);  he  mentions 
also  that  the  former  was  subservient  to  Aluberi,  the  Supreme  Spirit 
(ScK,  II,  319).  Among  the  Maipures  of  the  Orinoco,  however,  it  was 
the  Supreme  Being  Purrunaminari  who  created  man,  but  the  traveler 
just  cited  admits  that  the  above  tradition,  among  others  reported 
by  Gili,  shows  a  seemingly  evident  admixture  of  Christian  ideas 
(ScR,  n,  320).  So  also  does  the  alleged  Akawai  legend  that  Maku- 
naima,  admittedly  the  Supreme  Being,  put  his  son,  the  first  man, 
in  charge  of  aU  the  other  animals  that  he  had  just  made  (BrB,  126). 
On  the  other  hand,  the  Indian  seemingly  can  conceive  of  man's  origin 
only  from  something  already  existing  in  the  world  of  nature  imme- 
diately surrounding  him.     And  so,  in  considering  the  reputed  origins 


EOTH]  CEEATION   or   MAN,   PLANTS,  AND  ANIMALS  143 

of  the  various  tribes,  the  belief  becomes  more  and  more  prominent 
that  Mankind — and  by  Mankind  each  Indian  means  the  original 
ancestors  of  his  own  people — was  originally  derived,  with  or  without 
the  assistance  of  pre-existing  agencies,  from  various  animals  and 
plants,  from  rocks,  stones,  and  rivers. 

53.  Among  various  animal  forms,  "tigers"  (jaguars)  and  snakes 
constitute  the  commonest  sources  from  which  peoples  claiming  an 
animal  pedigree  have  been  derived.  Carib  history  furnishes  excellent 
examples  in  this  respect,  because  we  have  records  not  only  of  what  they 
themselves  thought  about  their  own  origin,  but  of  what  other  peoples 
also  beheved  concemiag  it.  Thus  the  Achagua  maintain  that  the  Caribs 
are  legitimate  descendants  of  tigers  .  .  .  chavi  in  their  language  sig- 
nifies a  tiger,  whence  they  deduce  chavinavi,  "arising  from  a  tiger," 
which  is  their  teraa  for  a  Carib.  Other  branches  of  the  Achagua 
explain  the  term  more  satisfactorily  thus:  cJuivi  in  their  language  is  a 
tiger,  and  chavina  is  the  spear,  lance,  pike,  pole,  and  from  these  two 
words,  "tiger"  and  "pike,"  they  derive  the  word  chavinatfi,  as  being 
the  children  of  tigers  with  pikes  (G,  i,  112). 

54.  The  Salivas  say  that  the  son  of  Puru  conquered  and  put  to 
death  a  horrible  snake  that  had  been  destroying  and  devouring  the 
nations  of  the  Orinoco;  but  that  as  soon  as  the  monster  began  to 
putrefy,  certain  large  worms  began  to  develop  in  her  entrails,  and 
that  from  each  worm  there  finally  arose  a  Carib  Indian  and  his 
woman;  and  that  in  the  same  way  that  the  snake  was  so  bloody  an 
enemy  of  all  those  nations,  so  her  children  were  savage,  inhuman,  and 
cruel  (G,  i.  111). 

55.  The  Warrau  version,  hke  that  recorded  by  Brett  in  his  Legend 
of  Korobona  (BrB,  64)  refers  to  a  special  water-snake,  and  the 
account  which  I  now  give  is  almost  word  for  word  as  related  to  me: 

The  Origin  of  the  Caribs  (W) 

A  Warraii  man  warned  his  sister  not  to  bathe  in  a  certain  neighboring  pond  at  those 
regular  periods  when  she  happened  to  be  unwell  (Sect.  188).  For  a  long  time  she 
obeyed  his  instructions,  but  after  a  time,  forgetting  all  about  them,  she  went  to  bathe 
at  the  forbidden  spot  and  time,  and  was  caught  by  a  lai^e  snake,  the  water-camudi 
Uamma.  By  and  by  she  became  pregnant.  Now  it  was  during  the  bullet-tree 
{Mimusops  belata)  season,  when  the  Indians  used  to  cut  down  the  trees  to  secure  the 
seed,  which  are  excellent  eating,  and  it  was  noticed  that  this  same  woman,  although 
she  took  no  ax  away  with  her  in  the  morning,  invariably  returned  with  a  large 
quantity  of  the  delicious  seed  in  the  afternoon.  The  brother,  thereupon  becoming 
suspicious,  watched  her.  Unobserved  himself,  he  followed  her  next  day,  saw 
her  approach  a  huge  bullet-tree,  and  saw  the  Uamma  snake  (Sect.  244)  exeuntem  ex 
corpore  feminse,  coU  around  the  tree,  and  make  his  way  up  into  the  topmost  branches. 
There  the  snake  changed  into  a  man,  who  shook  the  boughs  for  the  woman,  thus 
causing  the  seeds  to  fall  to  the  ground,  where  she  gathered  them.  Having  done  this, 
the  Uamma,  reverting  to  his  original  form,  descended  the  tree,  and  iterum  corpus 


144  ANIMISM    AND    POLK-LOBE    OF    GUIANA    INDIANS    [eth.  ANx.  30 

feminse  intravit.  Thereupon  the  brother  said^  "There  is  something  ivTong  here; 
this  wUl  not  do.  Soror  mea  probabiliter  serpentem  in  corpore  suo  habet."  So  he 
told  his  friends  who,  in  company  with  him,  watched  his  sister  the  next  day,  when  the 
same  thing  took  place,  Uamma  exeuns  sub  corpore  feminse,  climbing  the  tree,  chang- 
ing into  human  form,  shaking  the  seeds  down,  and  then  becoming  a  snake  again.  But 
just  as  Uamma  was  about  to  reach  the  ground,  the  watchers  rushed  up  and  cut  him 
into  thousands  of  pieces.  The  woman  grieved  sorely,  but  collected  all  the  fragments 
under  a  heap  of  mold  and  leaves,  each  piece  of  which  by  and  by  grew  into  a  Carib. 
Many  years  passed;  the  Caribs  growing  strong  and  numerous,  became  a  nation.  They 
lived  in  harmony  with  the  Warraus,  so  much  so  that  when  one  tribe  caught  some  game 
or  other  dainty,  they  would  send  a  child  with  a  piece  of  it  over  to  the  Warraus.  The 
latter  would  then  return  the  compliment  and  send  a  child  of  theirs  with  food  to  the 
Caribs.  This  lasted  a  long  time,  until  one  day  the  original  mother  of  the  Caribs — a 
very  old  woman  now — told  them  to  kill  the  child  which  the  Warraus  had  sent  to  them; 
this  was  in  revenge  for  the  way  the  Warraus  had  slain  her  snake  lover  years  before. 
As  might  have  been  expected,  the  Warraus  on  the  next  occasion  slaughtered  the  Carib 
child,  and  thus  a  blood  feud  arose  between  the  two  nations,  the  Caribs  finally  over- 
whelming the  Warraus. 

56.  The  Carib  version  of  the  story  was  told  me  on  the  upper  Pome- 
roon,  by  probably  one  of  the  oldest  local  survivors  of  the  tribe,  who 
spoke  somewhat  as  follows: 

The  water-camudi  had  an  Indian  woman  for  a  sweetheart.  During  the  day  he 
took  the  form  of  a  snake;  at  night,  he  was  "a  people  "  like  myself.  The  couple  used 
to  meet  at  the  water  side,  and  hence  the  girl's  parents  knew  nothing  about  their 
being  so  fond  of  each  other.  After  she  became  pregnant,  a  baby  camudi  was  bom. 
The  little  one  used  to  appear  when  she  reached  the  river  bank,  swim  about,  and  after 
a  time  return  to  its  nesting  place.  Now,  as  she  stayed  so  long  each  time  at  the  water 
side,  the  old  father  said  to  his  two  sons,  "What  is  the  matter  with  your  sister?  Why 
does  she  take  so  long  to  bathe?  "  Accordingly,  the  brothers,  watching  her  go  down 
to  the  stream,  videt  serpentem  parvam  exire  atque  serpentem  magnam  intrare. 
They  saw  also  the  huge  camudi  bring  his  infant  sjn  something  to  eat  and  saw  the  baby 
take  the  father's  place  when  the  latter  left,  ^"hen  they  reached  home,  the  sons  com- 
plained to  the  old  man  about  what  they  had  seen:  he  told  them  to  kill  both  the  snakes. 
So  on  the  next  occasion  they  killed  the  huge  camudi,  and  seizing  the  baby  serpent, 
carried  it  far  away  back  into  the  bush,  where  they  chopped  it  up  into  many  small 
pieces.  Some  months  afterward  when  hunting  in  the  neighborhood,  the  brothers 
heard  a  great  noise  and  the  sotind  of  voices  coming  from  the  very  same  direction,  and 
going  to  ascertain  the  cause,  found  foiir  houses  in  the  identical  spot  where  they  had 
•  cut  up  the  baby  camudi,  all  occupied  by  Indians  who  had  grown  out  of  the  fragments 
of  the  snake.  In  the  first  hut  the  house-master  said  he  was  glad  to  welcome  his  two 
uncles,  but  in  the  other  three  the  occupants  wanted  to  kill  them  for  having  destroyed 
their  sister's  child  from  which  they  had  all  sprung.  But  the  first  house-master  said: 
"Xo,  don't  do  that,  because  these  two  visitors  are  uncles  to  all  of  you,  and  you  must 
not  have  a  bad  mind  toward  them."  And  thus  it  happened  that  the  two  brothers  got 
away  without  further  molestation,  and  on  arrival  at  home  told  their  old  father  how  the 
snake  fragments  had  grown  into  people.  And  when  he  expressed  a  wish  to  see  his 
grandchildren,  his  two  sons  led  the  way  into  the  bush,  and  he  was  r^ht  glad  to  see 
his  numerous  progeny,  with  whom  he  made  good  friends,  and  they  all  drank  paiwarri. 
And  thus  the  Carib  nation  arose  from  a  water-camudi. 

57.  The  vegetable  world  takes  a  share  of  the  responsibility  for  the 
derivation  of  man.  There  is  either  a  story  of  some  fabulous  Tree  of 
life,  or  reference  to  certain  well-known  plants,  as  the  silk-cotton  tree 


BOTH]  CBEATION    OF    MAN,  PLANTS,  AND  ANIMALS  145 

(Bomhax)  or  it^  palm  (Mauritia).  The  Akawai  and  Makusi  idea  of 
creation  is  that,  co-eval  with  Makunaima,  there  was  a  large  tree, 
and  that,  having  mounted  this  tree,  with  a  stone  ax  he  cut  pieces  of 
wood  which,  having  been  thrown  into  the  river,  became  animated 
beings  (HiC,  244;  ScR,  ii,  319).  The  Arawaks  hold  that  from  his 
seat  on  the  silk-cotton  tree,  the  Mighty  One  scattered  twigs  and 
bark  in  the  air,  on  the  land,  and  in  the  water,  and  that  from  these 
pieces  arose  the  birds,  beasts,  reptiles,  fish,  and  also  men  and  women. 
The  sire  of  the  Arawaks  was  Wadili  (BrB,  7).  Some  of  the  Sahvas 
affirmed  that  certain  trees  used  to  bear  men  and  women  for  fruit, 
and  that  these  people  were  their  ancestors  (G,  i,  113).  The  Maipures 
and,  according  to  Humboldt  similarly  the  Tamanacs,  say  that  in 
early  days  the  whole  earth  was  submerged  in  water,  only  two  people, 
a  man  and  a  woman,  saving  themselves  on  the  top  of  the  high  moun- 
tain Tamanaku;  that  as  they  wandered  around  the  moimtain  in 
deep  distress  over  the  loss  of  their  friends,  they  heard  a  voice  which 
told  them  to  throw  the  fruits  of  the  Mauritia  behind  them  over  their 
shoulders,  and  that  as  they  did  so,  the  fruit  which  the  man  threw 
became  men,  and  that  which  the  woman  threw,  women  (ScR,  n,  320). 
Certain  of  the  Achagua  Indians  pretend  that  they  are  the  children 
of  tree-trunks  and  from  this  allusion  call  themselves  Aycuba- 
verrenais  (G,  i,  114).  Loku-daia  is  the  mythic  Indian  tree,  growing 
out  of  a  grave,  which  is  said  by  some  Indians  to  have  been  the  root 
from  which  they  sprang.  When  it  was  cut  down,  it  was  transformed 
into  a  rapid,  whence  the  name  of  one  of  the  Demerara  River  rapids 
(Da,  195). 

According  to  the  idea  current  among  the  Trios,  people  were 
originally  like  wood,  stone,  etc.,  and  had  no  faces  (Go,  12).  The 
manufacture  of  a  woman  out  of  a  plima  tree  (Sect.  29),  and  the  tree 
changing  into  a  man  (Sect.  9),  should  also  be  noted  here. 

58.  Not  a  few  legends  (Sect.  158)  connected  with  the  origin  of  the 
tribes  contain  curious  examples  of  animism  relative  to  earth,  rocks, 
and  stones  (Sect.  171).  The  Mapoyas,  the  Salivas,  and  the  Otomacs, 
all  three  of  them  Orinoco  tribes,  had  behefs  of  this  nature  (G,  i,  113). 
The  last-mentioned  used  to  say  that  a  stone  made  up  of  three  parts, 
arranged  in  the  form  of  a  pyramid  upon  the  summit  of  a  rock  called 
Barraguan,  was  their  earhest  ancestress;  and  that  another  monstrous 
rock,  which  served  as  the  sunmait  of  another  pinnacle,  two  leagues 
distant,  was  their  first  ancestor.  Being  consistent,  they  beheved 
that  all  the  rocks  and  stones  of  which  the  said  Barraguan  (a  high 
promontory  of  large  rocks,  bearing  hardly  a  particle  of  earth)  was 
formed,  were  each  of  them  one  of  their  predecessors.  Although 
these  Otomacs  buried  their  dead,  they  dug  up  the  skulls  at  the  end 
of  a  year,  and  placed  them  in  and  among  the  crevices  and  holes  be- 
tween the  rocks  and  stones  constituting  the  promontory  mentioned, 

15961°— 30  ETH — 15 10 


146  ANIMISM   AND   FOLK-LORE   OF   GUIANA   INDIANS    [bth.  ann.30 

where  they  expected  them  in  their  turn  to  change  into  stone.  The 
Mapoyas  would  call  such  a  stone  as  that  serving  for  the  summit  of 
the  pinnacle  just  mentioned,  Uruana,  describing  it  as  the  source  of 
their  tribe,  and  would  be  dehghted  at  any  one  speaking  of  them  as 
Uruanayes  in  allusion  to  this  fact.  These  tombs,  caverns  filled  with 
bones,  in  the  strait  of  Barraguan,  are  again  referred  to  by  Hum- 
boldt (ii,  487).  Some  of  the  Salivas  would  declare  that  they  were  , 
children  of  the  soU,  and  that  in  former  times  the  earth  used  to  breed 
men  and  women  in  the  same .  way  that  it  now  produces  thorns  and 
hidden  rocks  (G,  i,  113).  According  to  the  Makusi  tradition,  Maku- 
naima  sent  great  waters:  only  one  man  escaped  .  .  .  this  one  man 
who  survived  the  flood  threw  stones  behind  him,  and  thus  peopled 
the  earth  anew  (ScK,  ii,  320).  Those  of  the  Achaguas  who  believed 
in  their  origin  from  rivers  distinguished  themselves  from  the  tree- 
trunk  ones  (Sect.  57)  by  the  name  Uni-verrenais  (G,  i,  114). 

59.  The  Yahuna,  Indians  of  the  Apaporis  River  have  a  belief  in 
certain  pahn  trees  having  been  derived  from  the  ashes  of  a  human 
being  (Sect.  163 A).  The  Arawaks  and  Caribs  hold  similar  views  as 
to  the  origin  of  certain  cultivated  plants.  In  an  Arawak  story  it  is 
one  of  the  Bush  Spirits  which  suppUes  man  with  the  first  fruit 
plants,  whereas  the  Carib  version  gives  a  wonderful  tree  itself 
as  the  source  (Sect.  60).     The  following  is  the  Arawak  story: 

The  Fikst  Fruit  Trees  (A) 

There  were  three  sisters  alone  in  the  house,  preparing  drink;  the  men-folk  were 
away  at  a  party.  Early  in  the  afternoon  a  young  man  came  along,  bringing  a  powis 
with  him.  He  was  not  what  he  appeared  to  be,  a  friend,  but  an  Adda-kuyuha  (Tree 
Spirit).  (Sect.  96.)  The  girls,  however,  did  not  know  this.  Theyasked  him  inside 
and  offered  him.  pepper-pot  and  caasiri.  He  refused  the  former,  saying  it  did  not 
agree  with  him,  and  putting  to  his  mouth  the  calabash  which  contained  the  latter, 
he  broke  the  vessel.  This  made  the  girl  who  handed  it  to  him  laugh.  (Sect.  125.) 
She  was  the  youngest  of  the  three;  he  told  her  on  taking  his  depajture  that  he  would 
pay  her  another  visit  later  in  the  evening.  The  afternoon  wore  on,  and  night  fell, 
when,  sure  enough,  the  young  man  appeared  again,  as  arranged.  The  elder  sister 
took  a  good  look  at  him,  and  recognized  that,  though  bearing  a  great  resemblance,  he 
was  not  identical  with  the  person  who  had  visited  them  in  the  afternoon.  She  went 
into  the  adjoining  room  and  conveyed  her  suspicions  to  the  second  sister.  They  both 
kept  watch.  He  proceeded  to  get  into  the  hammock  where  the  youngest  sister 
was  lying,  and  began  caressing  her,  whereupon  she  said  she  was  displeased  with  his 
actions.  But  as  he  continued  troubling  her,  she  said,  "What  do  you  want  with  me? ' ' 
With  this,  he  slipped  his  arm  round  her  neck,  and  broke  her  "neck-bone,"  thus 
kOling  her.  He  then  began  eating  her  body  and  finished  all  except  the  head,  by 
early  dawn.  He  belched  and  said:  "Yes!  I  am  indeed  satisfied.  My  mother 
told  me  to  bring  her  the  head,  so  I  must  spare  it  for  her."  Holding  up  the  head 
by  its  beautiful  long  hair,  he  carried  it  away.  Now,  the  sisters  who  had  been 
keeping  their  eyes  on  him  all  night,  watched  well  where  he  carried  it;  they  saw 
him  bear  it  far  away  into  the  bush,  where  he  disappeared  with  it  in  a  hollow  tree, 
of  which  they,  following  him,  took  note.  When  they  got  back  home  again,  their 
men-folk  had  returned  from  the  party,  and  among  them  was  a  piai.    They  told 


BOTH]  CEEATION    OF   MAJS,  PIANTS,  AND   ANIMALS  147 

theee  people  exactly  what  had  happened  to  their  young  sister,  how  she  had  laughed 
at  the  Tukuyuha,  and  how  she  had  been  killed  (Sect.  125)  and  eaten  by  him.  The 
piai  told  them  to  collect  plenty  of  firewood,  and  to  bring  it  to  the  hollow  tree,  which 
the  sisters  were  able  to  show  them.  This  wood  they  piled  up  in  plenty  around  the 
tree,  and  then  started  to  fire  it.  It  burned  right  merrilyj  and  in  amidst  the  din  of  the 
cracking  timber,  enveloped  in  smoke  and  flame,  you  could  hear  the  whole  Tukuyuha 
family  screaming,  and  the  old  grandmother  reviling  her  wicked  grandson  for  having 
brought  so  much  trouble  on  them.  It  did  not  take  very  long  for  the  hollow  tree 
and  the  whole  family  of  spirits  to  be  reduced  to  ashes.  From  the  ashes  grew  the 
first  fruit  trees  of  our  forefathers — the  plantain,  the  pineapple,  and  the  cocoanut, 
with  all  the  others.  But  the  piai  had  to  taste  the  fruit  before  the  others  were  allowed 
to  touch  it. 

60.  The  statement  has  been  abeady  made,  on  Carib  authority 
(Sect.  51),  that  mankind  learned  from  the  beasts  and  birds  what 
wild  fruits  to  devour.  But  it  was  the  Bunia  bird  which  taught  the 
Carib  folk  all  about  the  cultivated  plants,  which  originally  grew  upon 
a  certain  wonderful  tree,  and  it  happened  in  this  way : 

Time  was  when  the  TTiHiana  had  no  cassava  to  eat;  they  all  8tar\'ed.  Animals  and 
birds  also  had  nothing  to  eat ;  they  likewise  starved.  It  was  the  Maipuri  alone  who, 
going  out  regularly  every  morning  and  returning  home  of  an  evening,  always  appeared 
sleek  and  fat.  The  others,  noticing  his  droppings — ^banana-skins,  cane  strips,  etc., 
talked  to  one  another  after  this  manner:  "Maipuri  must  have  found  a  good  place  to 
get  food.  Let  us  watch  him."  So  next  morning  they  sent  the  bush-rat  to  dog  his 
footsteps,  and  find  out  how  he  managed  to  keep  in  such  good  condition.  The  bush-rat 
did  what  he  was  told  and  followed  Maipuri  a  long,  long  way  into  the  bush,  when  he 
saw  him  pause  under  the  shade  of  an  immense  tree  and  gather  the  fruit  that  had  fallen. 
This  tree  was  the  Allepdntepo,  and  very  wonderful,  in  that  e\erj'thing  you  could  wish 
for  grew  upon  its  branches — plantains,  cassava,  yams,  plums,  pines,  and  all  the  other 
fruits  that  Caribs  love.  As  soon  as  Maipuri  had  had  his  fill  the  bush-rat  climbed  the 
tree,  and  picked  upon  the  com  to  satisfy  his  hunger;  when  he  could  eat  no  more,  he 
came  down  and  brought  with  him  a  grain  in  order  to  show  the  others  what  he  had  suc- 
ceeded in  finding.  The  Indians  thereupon  followed  the  rat  who  led  the  way  back  to 
the  tree,  and  by  the  time  they  reached  it,  many  plantains,  pines,  and  other  things  had 
fallen  on  the  ground.  After  they  had  cleaned  up  everything,  they  tried  to  climb 
the  tree  to  get  more,  but  it  was  too  big  and  smooth,  so  they  all  agreed  to  cut  it  down. 
They  made  a  staging  around  the  trunk,  and  began  hacking  with  .their  stone  axes, 
and  they  cut  away  there  for  ten  days,  but  it  would  not  fall — so  big  was  Allepdntepo. 
They  cut  away  for  another  ten  days  and  still  it  would  not  faU.  By  this  time  their 
work  had  made  them  thirsty,  so  the  Indians  gave  calabashes  to  all  the  animals  except 
the  Maipuri,  to  go  fetch  water;  to  the  Maipuri  they  gave  a  sifter.  When  they  all 
reached  the  waterside,  they  of  course  drank  out  of  their  vessels,  except  Maipuri  out 
of  whose  sifter  the  water  poured  as  fast  as  it  was  poured  in:  this  was  part  of  his 
pimishment  for  being  so  greedy  in  keeping  the  secret  of  the  bountiful  tree  all  to  himself. 
At  the  expiration  of  another  ten  days,  cutting  continuously,  the  tree  at  last  feU.  The 
Indians  took  away  as  their  share  all  the  cassava,  cane,  yams,  plantains,  potatoes, 
bananas,  pumpkins,  and  watermelons,  while  the  acouri  (Dasypwata),  labba  (Oi'to- 
genys),  and  other  creatures  crept  in  among  the  branches  to  pick  out  all  they  wanted. 
By  the  time  the  Maipuri  had  got  back  to  the  tree  from  the  waterside  only  the  plamj 
were  left  for  him,  and  with  these  he  has  had  to  remain  content  even  to  the  present 
day.  Wliat  the  Indians  took  they  brought  home  with  them  and  planted  in  their 
pro\ision  fields.  But  it  was  the  Bunia  bird  who  spoke  to  them  and  explained  how 
each  was  to  be  propagated  and  cooked,  and  how  some,  like  the  bitter  cassava  juice, 
had  to  be  boiled  before  drinking,  while  others  could  be  eaten  raw. 


148  ANIMISM   AND   FOLK-LOBE   OF   GUIANA   INDIANS    [bth.  ann.30 

61.  The  above  is  the  tradition,  almost  word  for  word  as  it  was  told 
to  me  by  an  old  Carib,  but  no  explanation  was  forthcoming  as  to  the 
origin  of  the  tree  itself.  Brett  however  ascribes  it  to  Tamosi 
(BrB,  103-114)  in  the  same  way  that  he  gives  Makunaima  credit 
(BrB,  126)  for  the  similarly  wonderful  Akawai  tree.  In  the  latter 
case  the  immediately  preceding  sentence,  however,  shows  an  un- 
doubted bias  due  to  Christian  influences:  "Makunaima  made  all  the 
beasts  and  birds,  aU  of  one  speech,  bade  them  live  in  unity,  and  put 
his  Son,  the  first  man,  in  charge  of  them."  The  same  author  gives 
also  an  addition  to  the  story  as  above  narrated,  by  the  mention  of  a 
fountain  or  swelling  waters  in  the  stump,  or  under  the  roots,  of  this 
wonderful  tree,  the  overflowing  of  which  is  temporarily  checked  by 
means  of  a  rugged  rock  (Carib)  or  an  inverted  basket  (Akawai). 
Owing  to  the  reputed  wickedness  of  the  people  in  the  one  case,  and 
the  mischief  of  a  howling  monkey  in  the  other,  the  waters  are  let  loose, 
and  a  flood  occurs,  which  overwhelms  nearly  everything,  most  of  the 
people  being  destroyed.  "Some  try  to  escape  by  climbing  a  high 
kokerite  palm  whose  top  reached  the  heavens,  but  a  poor  woman 
not  in  a  condition  to  climb  led  the  way,  and  halfway  up  was  turned 
into  stone  by  terror  and  exhaustion:  none  could  help  her  and  none 
could  pass  over  her,  and  all  who  tried  to  do  so  became  rocks  likewise. 
A  few  survivors  then  climbed  a  komoo  palm  and  so  saved  themselves" 
(BrB,  106). 

62.  Among  the  mainland  Indians,  I  can  find  no  explanations  cur- 
rent concerning  the  origin  of  the  first  birds  and  beasts.  Brett's 
statement  that  Makunaima  made  them  (BrB,  126)  appears  to  lack 
confirmation.  The  Island  Caribs  had  a  tradition  that  Louquo,  their 
first  man  (Sect.  51),  "made  fishes  out  of  scrapings  and  fragments  of 
cassava,  which  he  threw  into  the  water"  (BBR,  227).  Many  an 
animal  has  been  derived  from  the  spirit  (Sects.  69,  161)  of  mortal 
men. 


Chapter  V 
THE  BODY  AND  ITS  ASSOCIATED  SPIRITS 

The  Body:  Originally  considered  immortal  (63);  renovated  by  change  of  skin  (64), 
or  by  Fountain  of  Youth  {6S);  its  Laimortality  put  to  the  test  {66),  and  assured  by  its 
transformation  into  stone  (67). 

The  Spirits:  Several  in  each  body;  Shadow  Spirits;  Head,  Heart,  and  Pulse-beat, 
Blood,  Spittle,  Footprint,  and  Bone  Spirits,  possessed  by  both  men  (68-69)  and 
animals  (70):  become  associated  with  Dream,  Familiar,  Forest,  Mountain,  Sk\-,  and 
Water,  Spirits  (7i). 

Stages  in  Conception  of  Spirit  Immortality  shown  in  disposal  and  treatment  of  corpse: 
attitude  in  which  buried,  etc.  (72);  flattery  and  adulation,  festivals  and  feasts  (73-74); 
furnishing  dead  with  means  of  capturing  assailant  (7.5 1;  supplying  dead  with  dogs, 
women,  ornaments,  hunting  and  fighting  weapons,  and  food  (76);  eating  his  flesh  and 
bones  (77);  exhuming  his  remains  for  witchcraft  and  prophecy  (7S) ;  abandonment  of 
place  of  sepulture,  etc.  (79);  doubtful  animistic  indications  of  other  burial  customs 
(SO). 

Where  spirits  take  on  anthropomorphic  forms,  they  reach  their  final  destination 
direct  (81)  or  only  after  certain  trials  and  ordeals  (82),  but  the  idea  of  a  future  existence 
dependent  on  present  conduct  is  very  probably  a  borrowed  one  (8S). 

Spirits  are  Good  or  Bad  according  as  they  help  or  harm  the  Indian,  and  not  according 
to  the  bodies  whence  they  have  been  derived;  the  latter  conception  is  an  error  into 
which  many  missionaries  and  travelers  have  fallen — e.  g.,  the  Maboya  Spirit  {S4). 

Individuals  can  be  relieved  of  the  presence  of  undesirable  Spirits  by  use  of  rattle, 
by  blowing  (55). 

63.  As  with  many  another  savage  people,  there  are  traces  among 
the  Guiana  Indians  of  an  idea  of  perpetual  existence  of  both  body 
and  its  contained  spirits.  On  the  upper  Yary  River,  Cayenne,  when 
a  Roucouyenne  piai  is  buried,  the  flesh  (matiere)  and  spirit  remain  in 
the  grave,  to  be  visited  by  medicine-men  and  others,  as  well  as  by 
t)easts,  for  the  purpose  of  beii^  consulted  (Cr,  298) .  The  foUowii^ 
is  a  curious  case  from  Surinam  reported  by  de  Goeje  (22) :  ".\n  Ojana 
woman  asked  me,  when  I  came  again,  to  bring  her  a  teremopuilatop 
which  literally  means  'die-never  implement-for,'  so  that  her  little  son 
might  be  blessed  with  everlasting  life.  Wlien  I  told  her  there  was 
no  such  thing,  and  that  everybody  had  to  die,  I  met  with  the  same 
extraordinary  unbelief  that  Von  den  Stemen  records  in  his  'Unter  den 
Naturvolkern'  (p.  348)."  So  also  on  the  upper  Rio  Xegro  Koch- 
Grunberg  (i,  197)  was  apphed  to  for  a  panacea  {UniversalsmitteT) 
against  death. 

64.  Other  phases  of  this  idea  of  an  immortal  body  are  met  with 
in  the  myths  relative  to  changed  skins:  the  Indian  belief  is  that  those 
creatures  which  undei^o  ecdysis  Uve  forever.  After  Amalivaca  had 
Uved  a  long  while  with  the  Tamanacas,.he  took  his  corial  to  reach  the 
other  side  of  the  salt  water  whence  he  had  come.  Just  as  he  was 
taking  his  departure  he  sang  out  to  them,  "You  will  change  your 

149 


150  ANIMISM   AKD   FOLK-LOBE   OF   GUIANA   INDIANS    [eth.  axn.  30 

skins,"  {i.  e.,  "You  mli  always  be  young,"  like  snakes,  etc.),  but  one 
doubting  old  dame  called  out  "Oh!"  which  annoyed  Amalivaca  so 
much  that  he  now  said  "You  shall  die!"  (ScE,  n,  320).  When 
Kururumanni  [Kororomanna]  came  to  earth  to  sefe  what  the  Ara- 
waks  were  doii^,  he  found  them  so  bad  that  he  wished  to  destroy 
them,  on  which  account  he  took  away  their  everlasting  life  and 
bestowed  it  on  those  creatures  who  cast  their  skins — snakes,  lizards, 
and  cockroaches  (ScR,  n,  319). 

64A.  There  are  several  examples  of  this  taking-'off  and  putting-on 
of  skins  and  consequent  continuous  existence,  to  be  met  with  in  the 
Gmana  folk-lore  (e.  g.,  Sects.  64B,  iS7, 162),  therefore  I  can  only  con- 
clude that  all  of  these  are  stages  in  the  conception  of  the  same  idea  of 
living  forever. 

The  Man  with  a  Bad  Temper  (W) 

A  man  and  woman  once  cai^ht  a  girl  monkey  and  "minded"  her:  she  became  quite 
tame,  and  when  the  old  people  would  have  to  go  away  for  a  while,  they  would  often 
leave  the  monkey  in  chaige.  One  day  when  they  had  thus  gone  away  on  a  visit  to 
some  friends,  the  monkey  took  ofi  her  skin,  threw  it  over  one  of  the  house-beams,  and 
replaced  it  with  the  apion-belt  and  other  ornaments  that  the  household  had  left  behind. 
She  then  started  with  the  cassava,  which  she  cooked  and  ate;  finally  she  put  on  her 
skin  again.  •  When  the  house-folk  returned,  they  looked  for  the  cassa-\-a,  but  could 
find  none,  and  though  they  were  puzzled  a  good  deal,  they  never  suspected  the  monkey. 
On  the  next  occasion  that  they  had  to  leave  the  place,  a  young  man  remained  behind, 
though  hidden,  to  watch  lest  any  one  should  steal  the  cassava  a  second  time.  After  a 
while  the  monkey  took  ofi  her  skin,  dressed  herself  as  before,  and  commenced  baking 
the  cassava:  the  young  man  rushed  up  and  seized  her,  and  a  hard  struggle  took  place. 
"No,"  said  the  girl,  "I  am  not  fit  to  be  your  wife. "  "But  I  want  you  badly"  was  the 
rejoinder.  "That'saUveryweU,"  added  the  girl,  "but  you  will  ill-treat  me  and  knock 
me  about."  And  when  he  assured  her  that  he  wOuld  never  ill-treat  her,  she  at  last 
consented,  and  so  soon  as  she  agreed  to  yield  to  his  desires,  he  pulled  the  monkey  skin 
down  from  the  beam  and  threw  it  into  the  fire.  They  remained  together  a  long  time. 
By  and  by  she  bore  bi'm  a  little  boy.  And  now  her  troubles  indeed  again  com- 
menced, because,  getting  tired  of  her,  he  began  "lashing"  her  and  kept  calling  her 
"Monkey,"  and  annoying  her  in  every  way  he  could.  Suffering  so  much,  at  last 
she  said  to  herself,  "I  can  bear  this  treatment  no  longer;  I  will  return  to  my  people." 
Taking  a  calabash  and  some  it6-starch,  she  told  her  husband  that  she  was  going  to 
bathe  in  the  pond,  but  instead  of  doing  so,  she  really  went  far  away  into  the  bush. 
Her  husband  waited  long,  long,  for  her  to  return,  and  finally  followed  in  search.  By 
this  time  she  was  limping  along  with  the  help  of  a  stick:  she  was  trying  to  get  back 
into  her  original  style  of  walking  on  four  legs,  and  was  just  contriving  to  resume  her 
old  habit  of  jumping  from  tree  to  tree ;  her  little  boy  also  was  beginning  to  imitate  her 
movements.  And  when  the  husband  reached  the  spot  where  she  had  been,  there  he  saw 
her  with  the  baby  jumping  from  the  top  of  one  tree  to  the  top  of  another.  "Come 
back  home!"  he  kept  on  sKbuting,  but  his  wife  took  no  heed;  only  his  child,  who 
felt  sorry  for  hisfather,  threw  down  the  spiders  and  insectsfor  bim  to  eat.  Now,  though 
monkeys  eat  such  things,  men  can  not  eat  them,  and  so  he  had  to  proceed  hvmgry. 
"Come  back  home!"  he  again  called  out  to  her,  as  he  tried  to  foUow  her  through  the 
bushes  below,  but  looking  down  upon  him,  she  said,  "No!  I  have  had  quite  enough 
punishment  from  you  already. ' '  And  thus  they  proceeded  on  and  on,  the  father  run- 
ning along  on  the  ground  below,  the  mother  and  child  jumping  from  the  topmost 
branches  of  tree  to  tree.  At  last  they  came  to  a  wide  river,  and  here  the  monkey  cried 
out  to  her  people  Katanni-tdn  (i.  e.  "Come  and  fetch  us!").    And  they  made  the 


BOTH]  THE   BODY   AJSD  ITS   ASSOCIATED   SPIBITS  151 

■wind  to  blow  so  strongly  that  it  caused  the  opposite  shore  to  come  close  over  to  the 
tree  where  the  monkey  was,  so  close  that  the  tre^  on  both  sides  of  the  stream 
touched;  by  this  means  the  mother  and  her  child  jumped  across,  and  once  across,  the 
opposite  shore  with  its  bushes  drew  back  to  their  original  position.  As  the  separation 
took  place ,  the  monkey  called  out  to  the  man,  "  You  must  swim  after  us  if  you  want  us!  -' 
and  the  little  boy,  who  was  really  fond  of  his  father,  shouted,  "  Good-bye — ^I  am  going! " 
But  the  mother  would  say  nothing  further.  The  man  was  thus  left  on  the  nearer 
shore,  and  got  home  again  much  vexed.  He  destroyed  everything  that  had  belonged 
to  the  woman:  he  cut  up  her  hammock,  broke  her  calabash,  and  smashed  her  goblets. 
What  a  bad  temper  he  must  have  had! 

64B.  Another  example  is  to  be  met  in  the  story  which  I  am  adapt- 
ing here  from  Brett  (BrB,  177). 

The  Sokceeeb's  Daughter 

The  daughter  of  a  piai  fell  in  love  with  a  brave  young  hunter,  who  did  not  seem- 
ingly pay  her  any  too  much  attention.  She  begged  her  father  to  make  her  like  one 
of  the  yoimg  man's  dogs  so  that  she  might  always  be  with  him.  He  put  a  magic 
skin  over  her  shoulders  and  she  became  a  dog.  Thus  it  came  about  that  each  time 
the  youth  went  out  himting  with  his  four  dogs,  one  always  ran  back  home  and  would 
never  join  in  the  fray;  more  than  this,  he  found  that  whenever  he  got  home  in  the 
afternoon,  there  was  the  fire  burning,  the  cassava  ready,  and  all  neat  and  clean.  He 
thougiht  this  was  due  to  some  of  his  neighbors,  and  went  to  thank  them,  but  they 
denied  all  knowledge.  On  the  next  occasion,  therefore,  as  soon  as  he  missed  one  of 
his  dogs,  he  tied  the  three  up  to  a  tree,  and  returned  home  without  making  the  slightest 
sound.  Taking  an  advantageous  i)osition,  he  saw  a  lovely  maiden  there  making 
cassava,  and  doing  other  things,  while  at  one  side  there  hung  the  charmed  skin. 
He  swiftly  rushed  in,  seized  the  skin,  and  threw  it  on  the  already  lighted  fire.  He 
then  claimed  the  girl  from  her  father  for  his  wife. 

65.  It  was  owing  to  a  myth  relative  to  the  foimtain  of  perennial 
youth  that  Florida  came  to  be  discovered  just  foiu-  centuries  ago. 
Some  old  Island  Indians,  presumably  of  the  Arawak  stock,  assiu-ed 
Ponce  de  Leon  that — 

Far  to  the  north  there  existed  a  land  aboimding  in  gold  and  in  all  manner  of  delights; 
but  above  all,  possessing  a  river  of  such  wonderful  virtue  that  whoever  bathed  in  it 
would  be  restored  to  youth!  They  added,  that  in  times  past,  before  the  arrival  of 
the  Spaniards,  a  large  party  of  the  natives  of  Cuba  had  departed  northward  in  search 
of  this  happy  land  and  this  River  of  Life,  and,  having  never  returned,  it  was  con- 
cluded that  they  were  flourishing  in  renovated  youth,  detained  by  the  pleasure  of 
that  enchai)ting  country.    [WI,  788.] 

66.  Another  interesting  example  of  the  existence  of  this  idea  of 
immortality  is  connected  with  the  Arawak  stock  in  Porto  Rico : 

Many  of  the  most  hardy  and  daring  (of  the  Indians)  proposed  a  general  insurrec- 
tion, and  a  massacre  of  their  oppressors;  the  great  mass,  however,  were  deterred  by 
the  belief  that  the  Spaniards  were  Supernatural  Beings  and  could  not  be  killed.  A 
shrewd  and  sceptical  cacique,  named  Brayoan,  determined  to  put  their  immortality 
to  the  test.  Hearing  that  a  young  Spaniard  named  Salzedo  was  pacing  through 
his  lands,  he  sent  a  party  of  his  subjects  to  escort  him,  gi^dng  them  secret  instructions 
how  they  were  to  act.  On  coming  to  a  river,  they  took  Salzedo  on  their  shoulders  to 
carry  him  across,  but,  when  in  the  midst  of  the  stream,  they  let  him  fall,  and  throwing 
themselves  upon  him,  pressed  him  under  water  until  he  was  drowned.  Then  drag- 
ging his  body  to  the  shore,  and  still  doubting  his  being  dead,  they  wept  and  howled 


152  ANIMISM  AND   FOLK-LOBE  OF   GTJIAKA  INDIANS    [hth.  ANir.  30 

over  him,  making  a  thousand  ax>oI<^es  for  having  fallen  upon  him,  and  kept  him  so 
long  below  the  surface.  The  cacique  Brayaon  came  to  examine  the  body  and  pro- 
nounced it  lifeless;  but  the  Indians  still  fearing  it  might  possess  lurking  immortality 
and  ultimately  revive,  kept  watch  over  it  for  three  days,  until  it  showed  incon- 
testable signs  of  putrefaction.  Being  now  convinced  that  the  strangers  were  mortal 
men  like  themselves,  they  readily  entered  into  a  general  conspiracy  to  destroy  them. 
[WI,  779.] 

67.  Certain  of  the  Indians  (e.  g.,  Otomacs)  seemingly  held  the 
view  that,  after  death,  the  body  or  skeleton  itself  turned  into  stone, 
reverted  to  the  very  material  from  which  some  of  them  believed 
it  to  have  originally  sprxmg  (Sect.  58).  The  Atorais  regard  cer- 
tain enormous  blocks  of  granite  as  some  of  their  local  warriors  who, 
after  death,  have  been  changed  into  stone  (Cou,  n,  346).  Hence  we 
must  not  be  svirprised  to  find  cases  where  bowlders  (Sect.  171  et  seq.) 
and  bones  (Sects.  26,  91 )  possess  a  more  or  less  independent  animate 
existence  of  their  own.  The  transformation  of  people  into  rocks 
and  stones  by  way  of  punishment,  or  for  other  reasons,  may  be  a 
development  of  the  same  behef.  Thus,  a  long  time  ago,  the  Caribs 
came  up  to  the  Kirinampo  Rocks,  upper  Rupununi,  in  order  to 
surprise  the  Makusi  and  destroy  them  from  off  the  face  of  the  earth; 
but  the  good  Spirit  who  in  those  days  lived  among  the  Makusis 
took  pity  on  them,  and  changed  their  enemies  into  these  stones 
(ScR,  I,  375). 

68.  Having  reached  a  higher  stage  of  belief,  and  realized  that  the 
material  body  does  indeed  undergo  dissolution  at  death,  the  Indians 
are  convinced  of  a  Spirit  or  Something,  one  or  more,  being  set  free 
at  the  time  of  its  occurrence.  I  purposely  say  "one  or  more"  because 
it  would  seem  that  originally,  not  only  the  shadow,  but  also  the 
heart,  the  head,  and  the  more  perceptible  of  all  the  parts  of  the  body 
where  there  is  a  pulsation  of  arteries,  as  weU  as  perhaps  the  blood 
(Sect.  2.I1.OA),  the  spittle  (Sect.  112),  the  footprint  (Sect.  24),  and  the 
bone  (Sect.  69)  were  each  regarded  in  the  light  of  a  Spirit  or  Something 
that  was  part  and  parcel  of  the  body,  and  took  its  departure  at  the 
material  death.  The  Arawak  present-day  conception  of  this  Some- 
thing is  connected  with  the  person's  shadow  (Sect.  253) ;  their  terms 
for  a  dead  person's  spirit  and  a  person's  shadow  are  {7i)iyaMco  and 
Qi)iyd,  respectively.  With  these  same  people  according  as  this  spirit 
helps  or  harms  them,  they  may  qualify  the  designation  by  satu- 
Qi)iyal6ko  when  doing  good,  or  wdkaiatu-Qi)iydloko  when  doing  evil. 
The  hiyaloko,  strange  to  say,  does  not  appear  any  further  in  the 
folk-lore  collected  by  me,  unless  indeed  it  is  identical  miih  lya-imi  and 
so  with  Hyorokon,  Yolok,  etc.,  the  word  for  a  bush  spirit,  a  term 
which,  as  I  propose  showing  (Sect.  94),  is  met  with  throughout  the 
extent  of  the  Guianas,  from  the  Orinoco  to  the  Amazon. 

69.  The  mainland  Caribs  term  a  person's  shadow  ai-dkaru,  and  the 
spirit  resident  in  his  head,  his  Dream  Spirit,  oka  or  akari  (Sect.  86) ; 
but  after  the  latter  leaves  the  body  for  the  forest  permanently,  it  is 


BOTH]  THE   BODY   AND  ITS  ASSOCIATED   SPIRITS  153 

known  as  akor-tomha.  The  Warrau  expression  for  the  shadow  is  ameho- 
to-i,  while  dk-dbi  is  their  word  for  'heart'  or  for  the  heart's  Spirit 
which,  leaving  the  body  at  death,  becomes  their  Edm,  or  Btish  Spirit 
(Sect.  99).  The  Island  Caribs  applied  the  word  aJcambmie  [cf.  main- 
land Carib  akatomha]  to  the  spirit  of  a  person  whatever  it  might  be 
like,  the  women  speaking  of  it  as  opoyem  (KoP,  471);  unfortmiately 
no  information  is  given  as  to  the  particular  part  of  the  body  (head, 
heart,  pulse,  etc.)  whence  it  was  supposed  to  have  emanated.  It  was 
these  same  islanders,  however,  who  held  strong  behefs  in  a  connection 
between  spirits  and  an  individual's  heart-  and  pulse-beats:  "they 
talked  of  the  latter  as  the  Spirit  of  the  Hand  [RoP,  452];  they  spoke 
of  the  Spirit^something  near  the  heart  as  Gonanni  or  Lanichi"  (BBR, 
237).  This  one  at  the  heart  was  the  principal  one,  which  after  death 
went  to  the  sky  in  company  with  its  Ich6iri,  or  Chemin  (Sect.  89), 
to  live  therewith  other FamUiar  Spirits  (RoP,  484),  and  change  into 
a  young  and  new  body  (BBR,  237).  They  do  not  regard  the  spirit 
as  being  so  immaterial  as  it  is  invisible.  As  to  their  other  Spirits 
which  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  heart,  they  beheve  that  some  go 
after  death  to  make  their  home  on  the  seashore,  and  that  it  is  they  who 
make  the  boats  tack — these  are  known  as  Oumekou;  they  believe  that 
others  go  and  live  in  the  woods  and  forests — these  they  term  Maboyas 
(RoP,  484),  or  they  become  changed  into  beasts.  AM  these  Spirits 
are  of  different  sexes  and  multiply  (BBR,  237).  Koch-Grunberg  (n, 
153)  makes  the  interesting  suggestion  that  certain  procedures  con- 
nected with  some  of  the  death  festivals  point  to  a  behef  in  the  bones 
constituting  the  real  and  final  resting-place  of  the  Spirit  after  the  dis- 
memberment (Zersetzung)  of  the  body. 

70.  The  possession  of  a  Body  Spirit,  or  spirits,  was  not,  however, 
the  prerogative  solely  of  man,  but,  as  will  be  subsequently  shown, 
there  was  a  widespread  belief  in  the  association  of  spirits  with  animal 
life.  SiuT^ivals  of  this  cult,  in  part  or  in  its  entirety,  are  still  rec- 
ognizable in  the  folk-stories,  in  certain  omens  and  tokens,  charms  or 
talismans,  in  the  observance  of  certaia  tabUs  with  regard  to  food, 
in  blood-atonement  and  the  treatment  of  disease,  and  perhaps  in  the 
application  of  family  group-names.  So  also,  there  are  similarly 
many  traces  of  a  corresponding  association  of  spirits  with  plant-Ufe 
(Chap.  X). 

71.  The  general  mainland  behef  in  a  Something  (singular  or  plural) 
emanating,  disintegrating,  separating,  etc.,  from  the  dead  body  of  an 
individual,  or  an  animal,  and  either  remaining  in  the  immediate  neigh- 
borhood or  pursuing  various  courses,  hence  becomes  quite  intelligible. 
Thus  it  may  associate  itself  with  some  other  person,  to  become  his 
spirit  friend  and  adviser  as  it  were,  or  else  may  become  intimately 
connected  with  the  bush,  forest,  fields,  and  trees,  sometimes  with 
stones,  rocks,  mountains,  underground  caverns,  and  occasionally 
with  stars,  clouds,  lightning,  with  rain,  river,  or  sea.     Thus,  asso- 


154  AKIMISM   AKD   FOLK-LOBE  OF   GtTIAJifA  INDIANS    [bth.  asn.  30 

ciated  with  spirits  already  there,  we  can  speak  collectively  of  Dream 
(Sect.  86),  Familiar  (Sect.  55),  Forest  (Sect.  94),  Mountain  (Sect.  171), 
Water  (Sect.  178),  and  Sky  (Sect.  195)  Spirits.  I  have  met  with  no 
example  of  a  freed  spirit  associating  itseK  with  a  person's  shadow, 
and  hence  pxurposely  omit  the  term  Shadow  Spirits  (Sect.  68)  from  this 
category.  The  important  thing  to  remember  is  that  two  or  more  differ- 
ent kinds  of  spirits  may  have  been  derived  from  one  and  the  same 
body.  The  old  Spanish  Fathers  used  the  word  demonio  as  a  generic 
term  for  these  Beings,  in  the  same  way  that  some  of  the  present-day 
Creoles  employ  the  name  Devil;  there  are,  however,  too  many  diverse 
opinions  held  concerning  the  abstract  and  concrete  natm-e  of  the 
latter  to  permit  of  the  term  being  profitably  employed  for  compara- 
tive pmposes.  Others  of  the  Creoles  as  weU  as  the  "civilized"  Indians 
often  employ  the  word  "Mother,"  or  Mama  (e.  g.,  the  Mother  of 
Powis,  the  Water-Mama).  I  propose  using  the  term  "Spirit"  through- 
out the  following  pages.  Another  matter  to  be  borne  in  mind,  how- 
ever, before  proceeding  further,  is  that  these  Spirits  of  the  Forest, 
Waters,  etc.,  did  not  all  have  a  human  or  an  animal  origin.  Unfoi^ 
tunately  the  evidence  at  present  available  is  insufficient  to  demon- 
strate with  certainty  how,  or  along  what  lines,  many  of  them  thus 
closely  associated  with  the  chief  physical  characteristics  of  nature, 
came  to  have  an  existence  at  all.  Certain  of  them  (e.  g.,  Mountain 
Spirits)  would  seem  to  have  been  derived  on  a  principle  somewhat 
analogous  to  that  of  choosing  a  picture  to  suit  Jbhe  frame;  in  other 
cases,  they  may  perhaps  have  been  due  to  foreign  introduction, 
while  I  doubt  not  that  a  few,  like  Topsj,  "growed"  on  their  own 
account. 

72.  The  extent  or  degree  of  the  spirit's  immortality,  if  such  an 
expression  may  be  used,  varies  from  the  primitive  idea  of  its  hovering 
around  the  place  of  sepulture  to  the  advanced  view  of  its  translation, 
with  or  without  apparent  zoomorphic  or  anthropomorphic  reincar- 
nation, to  less  defined  realms  of  happiness  and  bliss.  There  is  nothing 
to  prevent  the  several  spirits  of  the  one  body  pursuing  different 
combes.  Indications  of  some  of  these  primitive  ideas  are  to  be  found 
in  certain  of  the. procedures  followed  with  the  corpse,  namely,  the 
position  in  which  it  is  laid  to  rest,  its  propitiation  and  address,  the 
objects  buried  with  it,  the  eating  of  the  fiesh,  the  abandonment  of 
the  place  of  death,  jnd  other  customs.  "McClintock  .  .  .  says  that 
the  .  .  .  Akawoio  races  like  to  bury  their  dead  in  a  standing 
position,  assigning  this  reason, — 'Although  my  brother  be  in  appear- 
ance dead,  he  (i.  e.,  his  soul)  is  stiU  alive.'  Therefore,  to  maintain  by 
an  outward  sign  this  behef  in  immortality,  some  of  them  bury  their 
dead  erect,  which  they  say  represents  life,  whereas  lying  down  repre- 
sents death.  Others  bury  their  dead  in  a  sitting  postm-e,  assigning 
the  same  reason"  (Br,  356).  Certainly  on  the  Pomeroon,  with  the 
Arawaks,  if  a  person  should  step  over  another  lying  down,  the  latter 


BOTH]  THE   BODY   AXD   ITS  ASSOCL4.TED   SPIBITS  155 

would  be  mortally  offended,  and  would  say,  "You  can  cross  me  only 
when  I  am  dead.  I  am  not  dead  yet."  This  is  of  interest  in  con- 
nection with  the  procedure  described  by  Schombui^k  (ScR,  i,  421)  at 
the  burial  of  a  Makusi  woman:  all  the  relatives  next  surrounded  the 
grave,  and  each  one  jumped  over  it  in  the  direction  whence  he  had 
come.  Even  the  barely  twelve-week  old  orphan  was  taken  in  the 
anns  and  made  to  jimip  over  it.  So  also  at  the  anniversary  of  the 
death  of  a  captain  among  the  Guahiba  of  the  Vichada  River  (Orinoco) 
the  pyre  is  jumped  over  by  the  piai,  the  men,  and  women,  at  the 
same  time  that  they  blow  with  full  force  (Sect.  85)  in  the  direction 
of  the  country  occupied  by  the  Piaroa,  their  terrible  neighbors  who 
make  them  die  through  throwing  spells  over  them  (Cr,  548). 

73.  However  beloved  or  despised  during  life,  the  spirit  of  the  dead 
is  always  an  object  of  dread,  and  is  to  be  propitiated  by  kind  and 
flattering  expressions,  by  festivals  and  feasts.  At  York  Hill,  near 
Tinadu  Creek,  Demerara,  says  Dance  (256),  an  Indian  child  had 
taken  to  the  habit  of  eating  sand,  which  contributed  to  its  early  death. 
While  the  dead  body  of  the  child  lay  in  the  open  coflfin,  which  his 
father  had  procured  from  a  Creole  carpenter  in  the  neighborhood, 
and  just  before  the  interment,  the  grandmother  of  the  child  stood 
over  it  and  in  wailing  tones  said: 

My  child,  I  always  told  you  not  to  eat  sand.  I  never  gave  you  any,  for  I  knew  it  waa 
not  good  for  you;  you  always  sought  it  yourself.  I  told  you  that  it  was  bad.  Xow, 
see,  it  has  killed  you.  Don't  trouble  me,  for  it  was  j'our  own  doing;  some  evil  thing 
put  it  into  your  head  (mind)  to  eat  it.  Look,  I  put  your  arrow  and  bow  by  your  side 
that  you  may  amuse  yourself.  I  was  always  kind  to  you;  be  good  and  don't  trouble 
me. 

Then  the  mother  came  up  crying,  and  said  as  in  a  chant : 

My  child,  I  brought  you  into  the  world  to  see  and  enjoy  all  the  good  things.  This 
breast  [and  she  exposed  it,  or  rather  held  it  up,  for  it  was  already  exposed]  nourished 
you  as  long  as  you  were  willing  to  take  it.  I  made  your  laps  and  pretty  shirts.  Itck 
care  of  you  and  fed  you,  and  played  with  you,  and  never  beat  you.  You  must  be  good 
and  not  bring  evil  upon  me. 

The  father  of  the  dead  child  likewise  approached  and  said: 

My  boy,  when  I  told  you  that  the  sand  would  kill  you,  you  would  not  listen  to  me, 
and  now  see,  you  are  dead.  I  went  out  and  got  a  beautiful  coflSn  for  you.  I  shall  have 
to  work  to  pay  for  it.  I  made  yotir  grave  in  a  pleasant  spot  where  you  loved  to  play. 
I  shall  place  you  comfortably,  and  put  some  sand  for  you  to  eat,  for  now  it  can  not  harm 
you,  and  I  know  that  you  like  it.  You  must  not  briug  bad  luck  to  me;  but  look  for 
him  who  made  you  eat  the  sand. 

This  was  a  famdly  of  C!hristian  Arawaks,  but  the  roots  of  inbred 
traditional  beliefs  could  not  at  once  be  eradicated. 

74.  At  the  burial  of  a  Makusi  woman  at  Xappi,  upper  Essequibo : 
Surroimding  the  hammock  in  which  the  corpse  lay,  in  and  between 
the  wailing,  the  women  were  chanting  eulogiums  upon  the  deceased — 
one  had  lost  her  best  friend;  another  praised  the  fine  cotton  thread 
that  she  had  woven;  another,  the  various  objects  that  she  had  pos- 


156  ANIMISM  AND   FOLK-LOEE   OF   GUIANA   INDIANS    [kth.  ann.  30 

sessed.  When  the  last  article  had  passed  out  of  the  door,  in  came 
the  piai:  he  proceeded  to  the  head  of  the  corpse,  bent  down  to  the 
left  ear,  and  shouted  several  words  into  it,  when  he  retired.  The 
piai  came  back  with  a  bundle  of  hair,  and  bending  down,  exposed 
the  corpse's  face  from  beneath  the  laths,  spat  on  it;  then  plugged 
the  hair  into  the  ears  and  mouth,  while  he  continued  spitting; 
then,  addressing  it  in  a  harsh  tone,  he  retired  (ScR,  i,  421).  So 
again,  at  the  death  of  a  Makusi  female  from  the  effects  of  a  snake 
bite,  all  the  women  of  the  village  gathered  in  the  hut  and  shouted 
unintelligible  words  into  the  corpse's  ears  (ScR,  n,  269)  .^ 

On  the  Moruca  River,  the  Warrau  women  sit  in  a  circle  round  the 
grave,  and  break  out  ever  anew  with  their  song  of  mourning,  which 
is  approximately  as  follows:  "Why  have  you  left  jonr  wife,  children, 
and  friends  who  loved  you  so  dearly?  Why  have  you  left  your 
home  and  field,  where  yams  and  cassava  were  thriving  so  well  ?  .  .  . 
Who  win  catch  agouti,  monkey,  fish,  and  turtle  for  us  now  ?"  (ScR, 
n,  446.)  "Why  are  you  dead?  Were  you  tired  of  life?  Did  you 
not  have  cassava  enough?"  are  among  the  expressions  addressed 
by  the  Island  Carib  women  to  the  corpse  (BBR,  252).  So  with  their 
fellow  tribeswomen  in  Cayenne  where,  on  a  death,  the  men,  women, 
friends,  and  children  assemble  and  weep,  or  rather  sing;  the  singing 
is  done  mostly  by  the  nearest  female  relatives  who,  sitting  on  their 
heels,  slowly  pass  both  hands  over  the  corpse  from  head  to  foot, 
while  reproaching  him  for  having  let  himself  die.  "Is  it  because 
you  were  not  happy  with  us  ?"  say  some.  "What  have  we  done  for 
you  to  leave  us  like  this?"  say  others.  They  add:  "You  were  such 
a  good  hujiter,  too!  You  caught  fish  and  crabs  so  well!  You  knew 
how  to  make  a  proper  provision-field,"  etc.  (PBa,  228).  On  the 
Orinoco  the  Saliva  mourners,  on  finally  eulogizing  the  deceased, 
would  say,  "What  an  excellent  fisherman  we  have  lost!"  "What  a 
clever  archer  has  died;  he  never  missed  his  mark!"  (G,  i,  197). 
Among  the  special  feasts  and  festivals  in  honor,  or  rather  in  pro- 
pitiation, of  the  dead,  I  would  mention  the  Arawak  Makuari  (Mora- 
Ktiyuha,  Sect.  73)  and  Hauyari  dances  for  deceased  males  and 
females,  respectively.  In  the  far  western  Guianas,  the  object  of 
the  Mask  dances  is  to  propitiate  the  spirit  of  the  dead,  so  that  he 
will  not  come  back  again  to  fetch  one  of  the  survivors  (KG,  138). 

75.  'Vnien  the  death  of  any  member  of  that  tribe  [Akawai]  is  supposed  to  have  been 
brought  about  by  unfair  means,  the  knife  of  the  deceased  is  buried  ■with  him,  that 
he  may  have  the  means  of  avenging  himself  in  the  world  of  spirits.  The  Warraus,  in 
similar  circumstances,  place  a  bow  and  arrows  by  the  side  of  the  dead  man,  that  he 
may  by  means  of  those  weapons  keep  off  malignant  spirits  in  his  passage  to  the  other 
world.    (Br,  356.) 

1  In  these  last  two  examples  there  is  difficulty  in  interpreting  the  real  signlQcation  of  the  shouting  into 
the  ears — ^whether  it  Is  the  deceased  or  the  mischievous  spirit  causing  the  death  (Sect.  SIO)  that  is  being 
addressed.  In  North  Queensland  I  have  observed  a  similar  custom.  There,  the  seat  of  intelligence,  life, 
etc.,  is  located  in  the  ear.'and  at  death  these  escape  through  this  exit:  hence,  by  shouting  into  the  deceased's 
ears  his  friends  are  trying  to  restore  these  essentials  to  their  proper  place. — W.  E.  R. 


BOTH]  THE   BODY  AND   ITS   ASSOCIATED   SPIRITS  157 

At  the  burial  of  a  male  Makusi  at  Pirari,  not  only  the  dead  man's 
knife  but  several  thongs  were  buried  with  him.  The  thongs  were 
put  into  the  grave  for  the  purpose  of  enabling  him  to  tie  to  a  tree 
the  kanaima  who  had  caused  his  death  (ScK,  i,  468).  Such  thongs 
are  to  be  seen  also  at  some  of  the  funeral  dances  of  other  tribes. 
Thus,  among  the  Roucouyenne  of  Cayenne,  at  the  p<mo,  or  first  of 
the  two  festivals  m  honor  of  the  dead,  one  man  alone  stands  up, 
holding  in  his  hand  a  whip  eight  meters  long.  With  a  swirUng  motion 
he  cracks  it  with  a  report  like  that  of  a  pistol;  each  one  in  turn  gets 
up  and  cracks  the  whip  (Cr,  258).  At  their  corresponding  festival 
the  Arawaks  use  whips  upon  each  other,  often  inflicting  terrible 
wounds.  To  receive  their  flagellation,  the  performers  put  theu-  legs 
forward  as  does  the  white  crane  or  stork  (Mycteria  sp.),  the  wooden 
effigy  of  which  the  masters-of-ceremony  carry,  this  particular  dance 
as  well  as  the  whips  being  thus  named,  after  the  bird,  moraktiyuha: 
this  Arawak  word,  corrupted  now  into  macquarrie,  mahiari,  etc.,  is 
seemingly  of  Tupi  origip,  the  creature  being  known  on  the  lower 
Amazon  as  magoary  (HWB,  146,  316). 

76.  Future  provision  may  be  made  for  the  deceased  by  burying 
with  him  his  dog,  his  women,  or  his  slaves,  some  food,  his  hunting 
and  fighting  implements,  and  his  ornaments.  Examples  of  these 
procedures  are  plentiful  in  the  old  records. 

His  faithful  hunting  dog  was  killed  and  placed  with  him,  and  the  grave  closed  in 
[Warraus,  ScR,  ii,  446]. 
His  dog  is  also  buried  to  guard  him,  and  watch  those  that  caused  him  to  die.  . 
If  the  deceased  owned  a  negro,  the  latter  is  killed  in  order  to  serve  his  master  in 
the  other  world.     [Island  Caribs,  BBR,  252.] 

They  imagine  that  the  Spirit  lives  the  same  life  as  the  man  lives  below;  and  this 
is  why  they  still  kill  the  slaves  when  they  can  catch  those  who  were  in  the  service  of 
the  deceased,  so  as  to  serve  him  in  the  other  world  [Island  Caribs,  RoP,  484]. 

There  are  buried  .  .  .  on  one  side  of  the  deceased  his  bow,  arrows,  club,  and  shield; 
on  the  other  they  place  one  of  his  wives  to  look  after  and  accompany  bim  [Orinoco 
Caribs,  G,  i,  201]. 

On  the  upper  Amazon,  when  a  mother  dies,  her  young  infant  may  be  buried  aUve 
with  her  [Sect.  B84]. 

Little  bits  of  bone,  fruits,  bread,  etc.,  were  strewn  on  the  corpse  in  the  grave 
[Makusi,  ScR,  i,  421]:  fruits,  bones  .  .  .  and  a  flask  filled  -yith  water  .  .  .  and  a 
drinking  cup  [Makusi,  ibid.,  468]:  bread,  fruit,  and  dried  fish  [Warraus,  ibid.,  n,  446]; 
at  the  side  we  find  a  vessel  which  .  .  .  contained  the  cowria  to  stimulate  the  deceased 
on  his  travels  in  the  other  world  .  .  .  cassava,  bananas  [Piaroaa,  of  the  Orinoco, 
Cr,  544-548]. 

It  is  almost  universal  amongst  these  Orinoco  nations  either  to  bury  with  deceased 
his  arms  and  ornaments,  or  to  burn  them  [G,  i,  207].  Buried  in  a  sitting  attitude  .  .  . 
and  all  his  implements  of  war  and  hunting  by  his  side  [St,  i,  399].  They  place  at  its 
side  ...  a  blow-pipe  and  a  quiver  full  of  arrows  dipped  in  curare  [Piaroas,  Cr,  548]. 
The  dead  are  almost  always  buried  in  the  houses  with  their  bracelets,  tobacco-bag, 
and  other  trinkets  upon  them  [Uaupes,  Rio  Xegro,  ARW,  346]. 

The  deceased  is  clothed  in  his  finest  ornaments;  a  crown  of  bright  colored  feathers 
on  his  head:  to  his  neck  are  attached  his  collars,  his  wooden  comb,  and  his  deer-bone 
flutes;  the  arms  and  legs  are  covered  with  bracelets  [Roucouyenne  cremation,  Yary 
River,  Cayenne,  Cr,  120]. 


158  ANIMISM   AND   FOLK-LOKE   OF   GUIANA   INDIANS    [eth.  ANN.  30 

Many  of  the  Indian  tribes,  but  chiefly  the  Caribs,  Makusi,  and 
Akawai  have  the  custom  of  burying  their  dead  either  ia  the  hut 
where  they  lived,  or,  if  a  case  of  death  should  happen  during  a  journey, 
a  shed  covered  with  palm  leaves  is  built  over  the  grave  to  prevent 
the  weather  from  inconmioding  the  person  who  rests  beneath  (ScG; 
271).  For  the  alleged  reason  of  making  doubly  sure  of  giving  the 
spirit  or  spirits  no  cause  for  wishing  to  come  out  of  the  grave,  certain 
of  the  present-day  Pomeroon  Arawaks  are  said  either  to  plant  cassava, 
or  to  place  a  cassava-squeezer,  upon  the  top  of  it. 

■J"?.  The  eatiag  of  the  corpse's  flesh  or  the  drinking  of  a  preparation 
made  therefrom,  except  in  those  cases  in  which  cannibalism  was 
indulged  in  rather  by  reason  of  vengeance  with  the  object  of  inspiring 
terror  in  their  enemies  (PBa,  171),  was  but  the  expression  of  another 
link  in  the  chain  of  ideas  which  culminated  in  a  belief  in  spirit 
inmiortality.  There  yet  remained  in  the  flesh  and  bones  of  the 
deceased  certain  qualities,  somethings,  spirits,  etc.,  which  could  be 
detached,  separated,  and  transferred  to  the  living  by  means  of  inges- 
tion. There  is  abundant  evidence  among  these  Guiana  Indians  of  a 
belief  in  the  transference  of  individual  (animal  or  human)  peculiari- 
ties through  this  agency  (Sects.  250, 280) .  Thus  in  order  to  strengthen 
their  own  courage  and  contempt  for  d«ath,  the  Caribs  of  the  upper 
Pomeroon  would  cut  out  the  heart  of  the  person  slain,  dry  it  over  the 
fire,  powder  it,  and  then  mix  the  powder  in  their  drink  (ScR,  ii,  430). 

The  Tariinas  and  Tucdnos  (of  the  Uaupes  River)  and  some  other  tribea,  about  a 
month  after  the  funeral,  disinter  the  corpse  which  is  then  much  decomposed,  and  put 
it  in  a  great  pan,  or  oven,  over  the  fire,  till  all  the  volatile  parts  are  driven  off  with  a 
most  horrible  odour,  leaving  only  a  black  carbonaceous  mass,  which  is  pounded  into 
a  fine  powder,  and  mixed  in  several  large  coucMs  (vats  made  of  hollowed  trees)  of 
caxiri:  this  is  drunk  by  the  assembled  company  till  all  is  finished;  they  believe  that 
thus  the  virtues  of  the' deceased  will  be  transmitted  to  the  drinkers.     [ARW,  346.] 

The  Salivas  on  the  Orinoco  also  pursued  the  practice  of  digging  up 
the  bones,  burning  them,  and  then  collecting  the  ashes  to  mix  with 
their  drinking  water  (Bri,  267) . 

On  the  other  hand,  in  the  lands  back  [of  Cayenne]  there  are 
nations  who  disinter  the  bones  when  they  consider  the  body  is  putrid 
enough,  and  after  calcining  them,  drink  the  ashes  which  they  mix 
with  their  vicou,  beheving  that  by  this  means  they  are  giving  the 
defunct  a  more  honorable  burial  than  by  leaving  them  a  prey  to 
worms  and  corruption  (PBa,  231).' 

78.  Surely  it  is  not  unreasonable  to  suppose,  granted  certain  spirits 
and  other  agencies  were  believed  to  be  contained  in  the  corpses,  that 
the  bones  of  the  deceased  distributed  among  friends  and  acquaint- 
ances, or  slung  up  in  their  houses,  must  have  served  a  purpose  other 

1  This  was  practically  the  identical  reason  given  mo  by  a  North  Queensland  aboriginal  native  when  I 
asked  her  why  she  had  eaten  her  little  child's  body  instead  of  burying  It.— W.  E.  E. 


»°TH]  THE   BODY   AND   ITS   ASSOCIATED   SPIEITS  159 

than  that  of  an  every-day  gift  or  ordinary  ornament.  The  Island 
Caribs  certainly  used  the  bones  of  their  friends  for  purposes  of  witch- 
craft and  prophecy  (Sect.  91).  The  practice  of  exhuming  the  remains 
after  longer  or  shorter  intervals,  although  not  direct  evidence,  may 
■  nevertheless  indicate  the  existence  in  former  times  of  a  similar  use  for 
the  bones  among  the  Mainland  Caribs  and  other  tribes.  Thus,  at 
the  expiration  of  the  year,  the  decomposed  body  is  dug  up  and  the 
bones  are  distributed  to  all  the  friends  and  acquaintances  (St,  i,  399). 
The  bones,  having  been  cleaned  by  the  fish,  are  packed  according  to 
size  in  a  basket  already  provided,  worked  -with  glass  beads  of  various 
colors;  care  is  taken  that  the  skull  of  the  deceased  forms  the  lid  of 
the  basket.  The  basket  is  then  hung  up  to  the  roof  of  their  houses 
(among  the  Warraus  of  the  Orinoco)  along  with  the  many  other 
baskets  containing  the  bones  of  their  forefathers  (G,  i,  199).  The 
women  (among  the  Caribs  of  the  upper  Pomeroon)  who  prepare  the 
bones  are  considered  unclean  for  several  months  (ScR,  ii,  431-2). 

79.  With  regard  to  the  abandonment  by  the  Indians  of  the  locality 
where  death  has  taken  place,  nothing  can  conquer  their  fear  lest  the 
deceased's  spirit,  located  somewhere  in  the  immediate  neighborhood, 
should  do  them  harm.  On  the  Orinoco  the  practice  of  rooting  up 
the  fields  which  deceased  has  planted,  so  soon  as  his  widow  or  widows 
have  buried  him,  is  also  almost  universal:  They  said  they  do  it  to 
destroy  all  memory  of  the  deceased  (G,  i,  207).'  With  the  Anabali 
and  other  tribes  of  this  same  river,  when  anyone  dies  they  bury 
him  in  the  place  where  he  had  his  hearth  and,  covering  the  grave 
with  many  mats,  they  forsake  the  village  and  all  their  fields,  and 
build  and  sow  at  12  or  15  leagues'  distance.  They  say  that  when 
death  has  once  entered  their  village  they  can  not  live  in  security. 
But  when  these  people  subsequently  advanced  to  a  settled  life — 
as  soon  as  the  sick  person  died  they  broke  up  his  home  and  burnt 
everything  which  the  deceased  possessed  (ibid.,  206).  One  of  the 
chief's  wives  had  died;  and  in  consequence,  although  the  settlement 
was  quite  new,  the  houses  most  comfortable,  the  cassava  still  in  the 
field,  every  man  had  abandoned  it,  and  left  this  poor  Indian  to  look 
after  the  crops  (Rupununi  River,  ScG,  238).  In  an  Ojana  village 
(Tuwoli's)  on  the  Tapanahoni  (Surinam)  three  people  died  in  1907 — 
Tuwoli's  adult  son  Paleku,  and  two  others.  One  house  of  TuwoU 
and  one  of  Paleku  were  burned,  A  month  later,  the  village  was 
deserted — the  survivors  had  established  themselves  in  another  one 
(Go,  15).  Among  the  Roucouyennes  on  the  upper  Parou,  Cayenne, 
the  common  laity  must  not  make  the  slightest  noise,  or  approach 
anywhere  near  the  grave  of  a  piai,  for  fear  of  meeting  his  fellow- 

1  The  more  probable  reason,  by  analogy  elsewhere  in  the  Guianas,  is  for  the  purpose  of  supplying  the 
necessary  drink  at  the  funeral  festivities. 


160  ANIMISM  AND  FOLK-LORE  OF  GUIANA  INDIANS   [bth.ann.  30 

colleague,  the  Tiger  medicme-inan  who  guards  the  corpse,  but  the 
spirits  of  the  distinguished  dead  may  be  visited  by  "doctors,"  by 
the  common  crowd,  and  by  animals  for  the  special  purpose  of  con- 
sultation (Cr,  298). 

80.  Of  other  obscure  burial  customs — obscure  in  the  sense  that 
their  real  signification  has  been  only  approximately,  if  at  all,  deter- 
mined— may  be  mentioned  that  of  the  Island  Caribs  (BBR,  252)  who 
place  two  weights  on  the  eyes  of  the  deceased,  so  that  he  may  not  see 
his  parents  and  thus  make  them  ill  (Sect.  253).  Most  extraordinary 
of  all,  however,  would  seem  to  be  the  procedure  followed  by  the  War- 
raus  at  the  mouth  of  the  Orinoco : 

On  the  deati  of  a  woman,  the  husband  lies  down  in  front  of  her.  He  remains  there 
a  few  minutes,  weeping  and  sLnging,  and  then  makes  way  for  each  and  all  who  have 
ever  had  connection  with  the  deceased.  As  no  Indian  will  willingly  act  contrary 
to  the  established  usages  of  his  tribe  .  .  .  such  a  custom  seems  calculated  to  prove 
a  check  upon  persons  who  are  not  desirous  of  having  their  actions  exposed  to  public 
notoriety.     [Cr,  612.] 

81.  WhUe  certain  of  the  Indians  appear  to  hold  advanced  views 
respecting  the  immortaUty  of  that  particular  spirit  which,  on  its 
departure  from  the  body,  takes  on  an  anthropomorphic  form,  they 
are  not  in  agreement  as  to  the  place  of  translation.  This  may  be 
identical  for  the  spirits  of  "good"  and  of  "bad"  people,  as  is  the 
belief  of  the  Warraus  and  the  Makusi,  or  at  all  events  the  places 
may  not  be  very  far  apart  (e.  g.,  the  Caribs  of  the  Yary  River, 
Cayenne).  According  to  the  views  of  these  people,  the  spirits  of  the 
"good"  and  "bad"  [within  certain  limitations  to  be  immediately 
discussed  in  this  and  succeeding  paragraphs]  rise  after  death  toward 
the  skies,  which  they  call  Capoun.^  The  former  travel  high,  very 
high,  above  the  clouds  where  they  find  pretty  women;  they  dance 
every  night;  they  driak  cassiri,  and  do  not  work  in  the  clearings 
(provision-fields).  The  wicked  remain  below  the  clouds  where  they 
are  always  roaming  without  any  hope  of  getting  higher.  If  the  body 
is  burned  immediately  after  death,  this  is  done  in  order  that  the  spirit 
may  ascend  with  the  smoke  (Cr,  298).  There  are  interesting  records 
left  to  us  concerning  the  Island  Caribs:  (a)  Some  hold  that  the 
most  vaUant  of  their  nation  are  carried  after  death  to  the  Fortu- 
nate Isles,  where  they  have  everything  they  can  wish  for,  and  that 
the  Arawaks  are  their  slaves;  that  they  swim  without  being  tired, 
in  the  wide  and  large  rivers;  and  five  delightfully  and  pass  the  time 
happily  in  dances,  games,  and  feasts,  in  a  country  which  produces 
all  kinds  of  good  fruits  without  being  cultivated.  (6)  On  the  con- 
trary those  who  have  been  cowardly  and  timid  in  going  to  war  against 
their  enemies,  have,  after  death,  to  serve  the  Arawaks,  who  inhabit 
desert  and  sterile  countries  which  are  beyond  the  mountains,  (c) 
But  others,  the  most  brutal,  do  not  trouble  about  what  takes  place 

,  '  Kabu,  Carib  term  lor  'sun.' — W.  E.  E. 


BOTH]  THE   BODY   AND   ITS  ASSOCIATED   SPIRITS  161 

after  death:  they  neither  dream  not  talk  about  it  (RoP,  484-485). 
The  Arawaks  maintain  that  the  spirits  of  "evil"  people  wander 
continually  around  an  uninhabited  desolate,  barren  place,  while 
those  of  the  "good"  occupy  the  air  above  their  former  huts  and 
settlements,  but  the  conceptions  of  these  Indians  as  to  "good"  and 
"  bad  "  are  not  identical  with  modern  European  views.  For  instance, 
if  an  Arawak  by  any  action  of  his  proves  himself  a  coward  or  faLat- 
hearted,  or  succumbs  too  frequently  to  excesses  in  drink,  he  is  called 
mako-huroTcwa  ['one  who  forgets'],  a  man  without  sense,  while  one 
who  shows  a  blameless  disposition  and  has  remained  a  stranger  to 
continual  intoxication,  is  named  a  Jcaka-hurokwa,  or  brave  man 
(ScR,  n,  497) :  the  spirits  of  two  such  people  will  be  separated  on  the 
lines  just  indicated.  It  must  not  be  forgotten,  however,  that  these 
Arawaks,  of  all  the  Guiana  Indians,  have  been  longest  in  contact 
with  civilizing  influences,  and  that  this  idea  of  a  future  existence 
dependent  on  present  conduct  may  be  but  a  borrowed  one.  Speaking 
generally,  the  trend  of  opinion  among  the  so-called  unsophisticated 
Indians  is  that  certain  of  the  spirits  of  people  departed  hasten  to 
a  place  where  they  will  have  all  they  want,  and  meet  their  friends 
who  have  gone  before.  The  prevalent  neglect  of  the  South  American 
natives  of  the  sick  and  the  want  of  love  in  dealing  with  them  can 
become  intelligible,  in  Schomburgk's  opinion  (ScR,  n,  318),  only  on 
the  assumption  of  their  behef  in  some  such  religious  tradition  as  this. 
82.  Certain  Venezuelan  Indians  believed  that  the  spirit  retires 
to  certain  lakes  and  is  swallowed  by  monstrous  serpents,  which  trans- 
port it  to  a  paradise  where  its  time  is  occupied  in  constant  dancing 
and  drinking  (FD,  52).  The  Otomacs  declare  that  peoples'  souls 
aU  speed  toward  the  West  to  a  place  where  without  trouble  or  toil 
they  live  at  ease,  but  before  they  reach  it,  they  are  met  by  a  big  bird 
called  Tigtitig,  which  seizes  upon  and  swallows  them,  unless  they 
valorousiy  fight  it  (ScR,  ii,  318).  Humboldt  (ir,  249)  speaks  of  this 
fabxilous  bird  as  Tikitiki  and  makes  it  responsible  for  the  deform- 
ities of  new-born  cliildren  (Sect.  279).  In  the  province  of  Cumana 
are  several  lofty  mountains,  the  highest  of  which  is  Tumeriquiri. 

In  this  mountain  ia  situated  the  cavern  of  Guacharo,  which  is  so  celebrated  among 
the  Indiana.  It  is  very  extensive,  and  serves  as  a  habitation  to  an  immense  number  of 
nocturnal  birds,  especially  a  new  species  of  the  Caprimulgui,  Linn.,  from  the  fat  of 
which  is  procured  the  oU  of  Guacharo.  Its  situation  is  commanding,  and  ornamented 
by  the  most  luxuriant  vegetation.  From  this  cavern  issues  a  river  of  considerable 
size,  and  in  the  interior  is  heard  the  doleful  cry  of  the  birds  which  the  Indians  attribute 
to  the  souls  of  the  deceased ,  which  according  to  them,  must  of  necessity  pass  through 
this  place  in  order  to  enter  the  other  world.  This  privilege  they  immediately  obtain 
when  their  conduct  has  been  irreproachable  throughout  life.  In  the  contrary  case 
they  are  confined  for  a  longer  or  shorter  time  in  the  cavern,  according  to  the  magnitude 
of  their  offences.  It  is  this  dark  and  dreary  abode  that  forces  from  them  those  groans 
and  lamentations  which  are  heard  without.  The  Indians  are  so  fully  persuaded  of 
the  truth  of  this  tradition,  .  .  .  that  immediately  on  the  death  of  any  of  their  relations 

15961°— 30  ETH— 15 11 


162  ANIMISM  AND  FOLK-LOKE  OF  GUIANA  INDIANS   [eth.  ann.  30 

or  friends,  they  repair  to  the  mouth  of  the  cavern,  in  order  to  ascertain  whether  their 
souls  have  encountered  any  obstacles,  or  been  allowed  i-o  pass.  .  .  .  Whatever  the 
fate  of  the  defunct's  soul  they  give  themselves  up  to  the  same  excesses  [drink],  making 
no  difference  but  in  the  nature  of  the  dance.     [FD,  129-130.] 

Tlie  superstitions  connected  with  this  caTern  are  recorded  also  by 
Humboldt  (i,  258). 

83.  It  has  been  mentioned  (Sect.  81)  that  in  the  case  of  a  spirit 
taking  on  an  anthropomorphic  form  there  were  indications  showing 
that  its  future  state  may  sometimes  depend  on  the  character  of  the 
individual  whence  it  had  been  derived.  But  mainly  for  the  reason 
that  the  more  complex  ideas  on  this  subject,  as  will  have  been 
recognized  from  even  the  few  illustrations  already  given,  are  to  be  met 
with  among  those  of  the  tribes  which  have  been  longest  ia  contact 
with  European  influences,  I  am  inclined  to  the  opinion  that  the 
belief  in  a  future  condition  directly  dependent  on  present  conduct  is 
not  only  of  comparatively  late  introduction,  but  is  a  borrowed  one; 
the  pui^atorial  nature  of  the  ordeals  to  be  successfully  undei^one 
by  the  spirits  (Sect.  82)  certainly  savors  stroi^ly  of  Roman  Catholic 
influences.  In  a  sense  this  opinion  is  strengthened  by  a  study  of  the 
Orinoco  Indians,  whose  original  beliefs  have  been  preserved  through 
the  careful  investigations  of  Father  Gumilla,  one  of  the  very  first 
of  the  missionaries  to  labor  among  them.  I  have  searched  his 
writings  in  vain  for  any  reference  to  the  doctrine  of  conditional  future 
reward  or  punishment,  or  to  that  of  a  purgatory.  In  the  same  man- 
ner, on  the  Aiary  (Rio  Negro),  the  Siusi  Indians,  an  Arawak  group 
which  has  been  but  little  in  contact  with  civilizing  influences,  appar- 
ently make  no  distinction  between  good  and  bad  spirits,  all  the 
members  of  the  tribes  after  death  finding  their  way  to  a  forest  upon 
high  mountains  on  the  upper  Ipana  (KG,  i,  166). 

84.  So  again  there  does  not  appear  to  be  sufficient  warrant  for  many 
of  the  old  travelers  and  missionaries  making  that  arbitrary  distinction 
of  "good"  and  "bad"  spirits  (according  to  the  bodies  whence  they 
have  been  derived)  which  has  led  to  so  many  disastrous  misconceptions. 
The  Indian's  idea  of  these  comparative  virtues  is,  as  might  have  been 
expected,  simplicity  itself,  in  that  a  spirit  is  good  or  bad  according  as 
it  is  for  or  against  him,  that  is,  inclined  to  help  or  to  harm  him;  it 
is  only  from  this  point  of  view  that  he  concerns  himself  with  the 
spirit  at  aU.  A  spirit  may  be  good  as  judged  by  its  source  of  origin 
(e.  g.,  a  brave  man),  but  bad  as  regards  the  evil  which  it  happens  to 
inflict  upon  the  person  concerned.  Thus  it  was  among  the  Carib 
Islanders,  that  the  good  Familiar  Spirits,  the  Chemin  or  Icheiri, 
(Sect.  67)  were  sent  by  their  human  associates  as  messengers  to 
carry  sickness  and  evil  to  their  enemies  (RoP,  472).  As  a  matter 
of  fact,  the  above-mentioned  misconception  of  the  Indian's  point 
of  view  affords  an  excellent  illustration  of  the  error  into  which 
certain  authors  have  fallen  in   failing   to  recognize  the  very  wide 


BOTH]  THE   BODY   AND   ITS   ASSOCIATED   SPIKITS  163 

distinction  existing  between  the  Evil  Spirit,  or  Maboya,  of  the 
Carib  Islanders,  and  their  Good  Spirit,  or  Chemin,  when  pursuing 
evil  courses.  It  Avill  be  convenient  to  rectify  this  error,  as  far  as 
possible,  here.  Maboya,  or  Maboia,  was  undoubtedly  of  human 
origin.  Thus,  of  the  several  spirits  which  the  body  possesses  (Sect. 
69)  some  "remain  on  earth  changed  into  beasts  or  into  Maboia" 
(BBR,  237) :  they  go  and  live  in  the  woods  and  forests  and  are  called 
Maboyas  (RoP,  484).  That  is  to  say,  in  the  same  way  that  others 
of  the  body's  spirits  attach  themselves  to  the  waters,  mountains, 
skies,  etc.,  and  remain  there,  so  the  Maboya  attaches  itself  to  the 
bush  and  forest.  Indeed,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  Maboya  of 
the  AntiUeans  corresponds  in  every  sense  with  the  mainland  Spirit 
of  the  Forest,  that  is,  the  Yawahu,  Hebu,  Yurokon,  etc.  (Sect.  94)- 
The  Mainland  Caribs  of  Cayenne  actually  used  the  identical  term 
Maboya  (PBa,  206).  The  people  never  invoke  Maboya,  as  some 
imagine  (RoP,  472) :  notwithstanding  the  extent  to  which  he  or  it 
may  be  feared,  and  in  spite  of  the  brutality  of  the  treatment  received 
at  his  hands,  the  folk  do  not  honor  him  with  offerings,  prayers,  adora- 
tion, or  sacrifice  (ibid . ,  476) .  When  the  proverbial  "  pain  and  anguish 
wring  the  brow,"  Indians  beheve  that  these  are  due  to  the  Familiar 
Spirits  of  some  of  their  enemies  by  whom  they  have  been  sent  (ibid., 
473) .  When  a  person  is  sick,  the  offerings  {anacri,  Sect.  89)  laid  on 
the  httle  table  (matutu)  are  not  for  the  Maboya,  as  (incorrectly) 
stated  in  one  passage  by  Rochefort  and  Poincy  (ibid.,  563),  but  for 
that  Famihar  Spirit  which  had  been  instructed  to  convey  the  sickness, 
or  for  that  Familiar  Spirit  which  had  played  an  important  part  in 
effecting  the  cure,  as  (correctly)  mentioned  by  the  same  authors  in 
another  passage  (ibid.,  472).  It  is  known  also  that  the  Island,  as 
well  as  the  Mainland,  Caribs  painted  or  carved  a  hideous  figure  of  this 
spirit  in  front  of  their  canoes,  not  only  to  frighten  their  enemies, 
but  in  order  that  the  spirit's  contemplation  of  its  own  likeness  might 
divert  its  attention  into  other  channels.  This  figure  was  said  to  be 
Maboia  (e.  g.,  BBR,  236),  but  as  it  would  be  ridiculous  to  assume  the 
existence  of  Bush  or  Forest  Spirits  upon  the  bosom  of  the  waters,  I 
am  forced  to  the  conclusion  that  it  represented  a  Chemin,  or  Famihar 
Spirit,  capable  of  course  of  committing  good  or  evil  according  to  its 
"master's"  instructions  (cf.  Sect.  48)- 

85.  Individuals  can  be  reUeved  of  the  presence  of  undesirable 
spirits  by  means  of  the  piai-rattle  (Sect.  289),  as  well  as  by  so-caUed 
"kissing"  and  "blowing."  It  is  this  latter  method  that  I  propose 
discussing  here.  While  one  writer  talks  of  kissing  being  "unknown 
among  Indians"  (IT,  193),  another  speaks  of  these  people  expressing 
tenderness  by  kissing,  not  on  the  hps,  but  on  aU  parts  of  the  body 
(Cr,  175).  If  osculation  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  sign  of  amativeness, 
the   fijrmer   is  an  error,  because  certainly  among  Caribs,  Akawai^ 


164  ANIMISM   AND   FOLK-LOBE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS    [eth.  ANN.  30 

Warraus,  and  Arawaks,  this  is  expressed  by  man  or  woman,  in  the 
protrusion  of  the  tip  of  the  tongue  between  the  loosely  closed  lips. 
What  can  also  be  considered  a  form  of  kissing  is  the  custom  of  one 
individual  blowing  upon  another  under  particular  circumstances. 
The  object  of  this  blowing  is  explained  by  Schomburgk  (ScR,  ii,  254) 
on  the  principle  that  both  by  the  Indians  "and  the  Orientals,  the 
breath  is  regarded  as  an  emanation  of  the  most  inward  spiritual  and 
mental  vigor."  A  far  more  satisfactory  explanation,  however, 
would  seem  to  lie  in  the  fact  that  the  blowing  is  intended  to  drive 
away  an  attached  Evil  Spirit,  etc.,  as  is  indeed  the  belief  among 
the  Galibi  piai  (Sect.  SIO)  and  elsewhere  (Sects.  I4.,  59,  72,  246,  319), 
a  view  which  is  only  strengthened  by  the  particular  circumstances, 
above  referred  to,  under  which  it  is  practised,  namely,  in  sickness,  or 
in  absence  of  adequate  protecting  influences.  On  the  way  to  Eoraima, 
the  Serekong  "women  brought  us  several  of  their  sick  children  for 
us  to  breathe  upon  their  faces,  and  so  restore  them  to  health" 
(ScR,  II,  253).  At  Curasawaka  streamlet,  "a  pretty-looking  Makusi 
mother  insisted  upon  my  blowing  in  the  face  of  her  sickly  infant, 
which  she  believed  would  act  as  a  charm,  and  restore  her  child  to 
health"  (ScE,  177).  "Before  we  left,  she  [the  old  Indian  woman] 
made  the  entire  party  [on  our  way  to  Roraima]  blow  three  times  on 
her  back  for  good  luck,  but  whether  the  luck  was  for  her  or  for  us 
we  never  found  out"  (BW,  217). 

[At  Taiepong  Village,  upper  Potaro]  when  on  the  point  of  leaving,  a  woman  stepped 
forward  to  an  old  Indian  in  one  of  ovir  canoes,  and  held  up  her  head.  He  tapped  her 
forehead  with  his  fingers,  muttered  a  few  words,'  and  then  blew  on  her  temple.  This 
was  done  to  charm  away  a  pain  in  the  head,  the  old  fellow  being  a  peaiman,  and 
capable  of  effecting  such  cures.  On  our  arrival  at  villages  I  have  sometimes  seen  a 
woman  carry  her  infant  round  to  one  after  another  of  the  Indians  of  my  party,  each 
man  as  she  passed  stooping  down  and  blowing  gently  on  the  face  of  the  chUd. 
[Bro,  202.] 

Among  the  Arawak  and  the  Warrau,  when  the  child  cries,  or  when 
father  or  mother  leave  it  to  set  out  on  the  chase,  to  work  in  the  field, 
etc.,  they  wiU  blow  either  on  the  child's  face  or  hand;  but  they  do 
nothing  of  the  sort  on  their  return.  It  is  a  Makusi  custom  for  the 
infant  to  be  blown  upon  (angeblasen)  by  the  relatives,  before  its 
parents  take  to  their  hammocks  (ScR,  11,  314)  to  keep  the  couvade. 
With  the  same  tribe,  the  piai  will  blow  upon  the  girl  after  themenstrua- 
tion  ceremony  ^^-ith  the  object  of  disenchanting  her  (Sect.  267)- 


Chapter  VI 
DKEAMS;  IDIOCY 

Head  Spirits  are  the  causes  of  Dreams  (86);  the  Unreality  and  Reality  of  Dream- 
life  (87).    Idiocy  (88). 

86.  From  Mainland  Caribs,  those  on  the  Pomeroon  and  Moruca 
Rivers,  I  have  learned  that  the  Aka,  or  Akari,  Spirit  (Sect.  69)  resides 
in  the  head.  Yurokon,  their  Bush  Spirit  (Sect.  94),  comes  along 
when  the  person  is  asleep,  seizes  the  Akari,  and  takes  it  with  him 
into  the  forest;  this  causes  people  to  dream,  but  sometimes  Yurokon 
forgets,  and  does  not  bring  it  back,  with  the  consequence  that  the 
individual  dies.  In  dreaming,  the  Indians  say  that  the  spirit  is 
paying  a  visit  to  the  worid  to  come  (KG,  i,  167)  or  has  gone  for  a 
walk,  etc.  (ibid.,  n,  151). 

87.  While  Coudreau  (ii,  198)  seems  emphatic  m  his  remark  con- 
cerning the  Uaupes  River  Indians,  that  they  have  the  correct  idea 
of  a  dream,  and  do  not  take  for  reality  the  visions  of  sleep,  im  Thum 
would  seem  to  have  an  equally  positive  opinion  to  the  contrary. 
The  latter  (344-345)  teUs  us  how- 
One  morning  when  it  was  important  for  me  to  get  away  I  found  that  one  of 

the  invalids,  a  young  Macusi,  though  better  in  health,  was  so  enraged  against  me 
that  he  refused  to  stir,  for  he  declared  that,  with  great  want  of  consideration  for  his 
weak  health,  I  had  taken  him  out  during  the  night  and  had  made  him  haul  the  canoe 
up  a  series  of  difficult  cataracts.  Nothing  could  persuade  him  that  this  was  but  a 
dream,  and  it  was  some  time  before  he  was  so  far  pacified  as  to  throw  himself  sulkily 
into  the  bottom  of  the  canoe.  .  .  More  than  once,  the  men  declared  in  the  morning 
that  some  absent  man,  whom  they  named,  had  come  during  the  night,  and  had  beaten 
or  otherwise  maltreated  them;  and  they  insisted  upon  much  rubbing  of  the  bruised 
parts  of  their  bodiei. 

Laborde  records  similar  experiences  from  the  Island  Caribs:  "At 

night,  I  have  heard  them,  sometimes  two  at  once,  complain,  cry, 

wake  with  a  start,  and  tell  me  that  the  devil  wanted  to  beat  them. 

They  went  on  screaming  when  quite  awake,"   etc.    (BBR,   236). 

Rochef ort  and  Poincy  confirm  this  for  the  same  people :  the  Caribs 

are  also  subject  to  other  ills  which  they  say  come  from  Maboya, 

and  often  complain  that  he  is  hitting  them,  especially  during  sleep 

(RoP,  474).     The  medicine-men  appear  generally  to  have  enjoyed  a 

great  reputation  as  dreamers  (Sects.  264,300).    More  than  this,  dreams 

were  sometimes  interpreted  as  omens  and  auguries;  thus,  in  token 

of  the  missionarj'  coming  to  visit  them,  and  a  sign  of  his  approach, 

a  certain  cacique  told  Gumilla  that  he  had  dreamed  that  his  lands 

sewn  with  seed  were  very  dry,  and  that  the  rain  had  fallen  just  in 

the  nick  of  time  (G,  i,  311). 

165 


166  ANIMISM   AND   FOLK-LOKB  OF   GUIANA  INDIANS    [bth.  ANN.  30 

88.  In  connection  with  the  idea  of  at  least  one  of  the  individual's 
Spirits  beiog  located  in  his  head,  it  is  of  interest  to  record  Schom- 
bui^k's  obserrations  amoi^  the  Wapisiana  on  the  Takutu  River 
with  regard  to  idiocy:  ImbecUes  are  r^arded  with  awe  by  the 
Indians,  for  according  to  their  traditions,  these  are  in  dose  intimacy 
with  good  Spirits,  and  hence  their  words, and  actions  are  regarded 
as  signs  of  divinity  (ScE,  ii,  54) ;  their  doings  and  sayings  are  con- 
sidered oracular  (ScT,  44).  True  it  is  also  that  imbeciles  are  regarded 
as  "uncanny"  and  that  they  will  often  carry  out  with  impunity  and 
success  many  a  deed  which  people  in  their  right  senses  would  not 
even  attempt.     Here  is  a  case  in  point,  from  the  Warraus. 

The  Idiot  Who  Wanted  to  Fly  (W) 

A  man  was  blessed  with  a  sister  and  mother,  but  imfortunately  was  without  good 
sense,  and  for  this  reason  he  was  known  as  Wabassi  (lit.,  a  sickly  person).  His  sister 
had  a  dog  called  Warribisi(Kt.,  a  wasp).  One  day  Wabassi  went  down  to  the  seashore 
to  catch  big  bunari  crabs,  and  just  as  he  was  about  to  step  out  of  the  boat,  an  immense 
tiger  approached;  thinMngit  was  his  sister's  dog,  he  exclaimed:"  Warribisi!  Warribisi! 
Come  on!  What  are  you  doing  here?  "  And  as  the  creature  trotted  up  quite  close, 
he  seized  it  round  the  waist,  and  tried  to  pull  it  into  the  boat.  Of  coiuse  the  tiger 
growled,  but  all  Wabassi  said  was,  "Don't  bite  me,  Warribisi,"  and  as  the  animal 
was  too  heavy  and  clumsy  to  be  dragged  in,  he  lost  his  temper  and  said:  "Stupid 
Warribisi.  Stay  where  you  are,  then,  and  may  Tiger  come  and  eat  you!"  When 
Wabassi  got  home,  he  told  his  sister  that  he  had  seen  her  dog.  She  said:  "No,  you 
did  not.  You  can  not  be  in  your  right  senses.  Warribisi  has  been  here  with  me  all 
the  time."  On  another  occasion  Wabassi  joined  some  friends  and  relatives  on  a 
hunting  expedition:  they  came  across  a  herd  of  bush-hog,  and  Wabassi  shot  one. 
By  and  by,  his  friends  collected  into  one  big  heap  all  the  hogs  that  they  had  shot, 
and  Wabassi  came  to  have  a  look  at  their  spoil,  leaving  his  own  quarry  behind. 
"Oh!"  said  he,  "my  bush-hog  is  different  from  these.  Mine  has  a  mark  on  his 
head,  and  a  flat  nose."  So  the  other  hunters  told  him  to  go  and  fetch  it  and  let  them 
have  a  look.  When  they  saw  it,  they  were  much  surprised  to  recognize  a  tiger,  and 
still  more  so  to  learn  that  his  captor  had  not  even  met  with  a  scratch.  Next  day 
after  they  reached  home.  Wabassi  dressed  himself  like  a  bird,  wjfh  a  feather  (repre- 
senting the  tail)  stuck  into  his  belt  behind;  he  climbed  a  high  tree  and  jumped  from 
limb  to  limb  three  times;  on  the  fourth  occasion  he  alighted  on  a  dry  limb,  which 
broke,  and  he  fell  to  earth.  "How  splendidly  I  can  fly!"  he  remarked,  when  he 
picked  himself  up. 

88A.  The  picking  up,  or  handling  of,  certain  birds'  feathers  con- 
duces to  loss  of  memory  and  to  insanity  (Sect. 


Chaptek  VII 

FAMILIAR  SPIRITS 

The  cult  of  Familiar  Spirits  reacted  a  high,  development  among  the  Island  Carib 
folk  (89).  Though  presented  with  offerii^  and  other  things,  these  Spirits  could  be 
invoked  only  by  the  Medicine-man  (90),  and,  being  more  or  less  intimately  asso- 
ciated with  human  bones,  were  often  called  into  requisition  for  piuposes  of  Witchcraft 
and  Prophecy  {91).  The  Island  Arawak  people  also  had  similar  Familiar  Spirits  (9f ), 
the  belief  in  whose  existence  is  even  yet  traceable  on  the  Guiana  mainland  (9S). 
Familiar  Spirits  an'd  Couvade  (93 A). 

89.  The  cult  of  the  Familiar  Spirit  would  appear  to  have  reached  a 
high  stage  of  development  among  the  island  tribes;  at  any  rate,  it 
is  from  these  people  that  comparatively  complete  records  of  its  exist- 
ence have  come  down  to  us.  Thus  with  the  Carib  Islanders:  "The 
good  spirits  which  are  their  gods  are  more  particularly  expressed  as 
Ichehi  (by  men)  and  Chemin  (by  women) :  They  beUeve  that  these 
good  spirits,  or  these  gods,  are  in  great  numbers,  and  in  this  pluraUty 
each  person  beheves  he  has  a  special  one  for  himself — ^his  own  par- 
ticular spirit,  his  own  famiUar:  They  say  that  these  gods  reside  in 
the  sky,  but  do  not  know  what  they  do  there,  and  they  themselves 
show  no  signs  of  recogniziag  them  as  the  creators  of  the  world  and  of 
things  that  are"  (RoP,  471).  The  precise  source  or  origin  of  these 
FamiHar  Spirits  is  unf  orttmately  nowhere  given,  beyond  the  statement 
that  they  leave  the  human  body  at  death  in  company  with  the  par- 
ticiilar  spirit  connected  with  the  deceased's  heart  (ibid.,  484).  Again: 
The  Island  Caribs  dedicated  no  temples  or  altars  to  their  divinities, 
these  Icheiri  or  Chemin:  they  made  them  no  sacrifices.  They  simply 
made  them  offerings  of  cassava,  and  their  first  fruits.  Above  all, 
when  they  beheved  that  they  had  been  cm-ed  by  them  of  some  illness, 
they  had  a  feast  in  their  honor  and  offered  them  cassava  and  ouicou. 
All  these  offerings  are  known  as  anacri  [alakri]:  they  place  these  at 
one  end  of  the  hut  in  vessels,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  thing,  on 
one  or  several  fMitutus,  or  small  tables  plaited  of  nishes  and  palm 
leaves.  Each  one  in  the  hut  can  make  these  offerings  to  his  [Familiar] 
Spirit;  but  such  offerings  are  not  accompanied  by  any  adoration  or 
prayer,  and  consist  only  of  the  actual  presentation  of  the  gifts  (ibid., 
472). 

90.  To  invoke  them,  however,  requires  the  Boy 6  (medicine-man), 
together  with  incantations  and  tobacco  smoke.  This  is  the  case 
chiefly  on  four  occasions:  (a)  to  be  revenged  on  some  one  who  has 
done  them  harm,  and  so  draw  punishment  on  him;  (&)  to  get  cured 
of  some  illness  and  leam  the  results  of  it;  (c)  to  consult  them  on  the 

167 


168  ANIMISM  AND  FOLK-LORE  OP  GUIANA  INDIANS   [eth.  ann.  30 

issues  of  their  wars ;  (d)  and  to  hunt  away  the  Evil  Spirit,  Maboya 
Goc.  cit.).  When  the  Boye  has  made  his  Familiar  Spirit  appear  (Sect. 
314-),  the  latter  is  heard  to  reply  clearly  to  the  questions  put  to  him: 
he  is  heard  to  click  his  jaws  as  if  eating  and  driaking  the  anacri,  but 
next  morning  they  find  that  he  has  not  touched  it.  These  temporal 
viands  which  have  been  soiled  by  these  unfortunate  spirits  are  deemed 
so  sacred  by  the  magician  and  the  people  whom  they  have  abused 
that  it  is  only  the  old  men  and  the  most  illustrious  among  them 
who  are  free  to  partake  of  them,  and  even  then  they  dare  not  taste 
them  unless  they  have  a  certain  cleanliness  of  person  (RoP,  473). 
"They  have  asked  me,"  says  Father  de  la  Borde,  "sometimes  to 
drink  of  it,  and  I  have  done  so  just  to  try  and  change  their  super- 
stitious ideas,  one  of  which  is  to  drink  of  this  ouicou  before  eating, 
otherwise  you  die,  and  purposely  I  ate  first  before  drinking;  another 
is  to  keep  the  cup  straight  so  as  not  to  spill  the  contents,  otherwise 
the  eyes  would  run  water  everlastingly.  I  purposely  spilt  some,  and 
held  the  cup  crooked  "  (BBR,  235). 

91.  These  Familiar  Spirits  [Icheiri  or  Chemin]  often  nestle  them- 
selves inside  bones  taken  from  a  grave,  which  are  wrapped  up  with 
cotton  into  grotesque  figures,  and  so  give  oracles:  they  say  it  is  the 
Spirit  of  the  Dead  that  talks,  (RoP,  473,  479).  "They  sometimes  put 
the  hairs,  or  some  bones,  of  their  deceased  parents  into  a  calabash. 
They  keep  these  in  their  huts,  and  use  them  for  some  sorcery. 
They  say  that  the  spirit  of  the  dead  one  speaks  through  these,  and 
forewarns  them  of  the  designs  of  their  enemies  "  (BBR,  236).  More 
than  this,  bones  prepared  with  cotton,  as  above  mentioned,  are  used 
for  bewitching  their  enemies,  and  for  this  purpose  the  sorcerers  wrap 
them  up  with  something  that  belongs  to  their  enemy  (RoP,  473). 

These  Familiar  Spirits  also  enter  into  the  bodies  of  fenaales  and 
speak  through  them  (loc.  cit.).  In  order  to  turn  aside  the  vials  of 
their  wrath  and  to  divert  the  anger  of  these  Spirits,  tobacco  leaves 
are  smoked  in  their  honor  through  the  agency  of  the  Boyes,  their 
hideous  Hkenesses  are  painted  on  the  canoes,  or  the  Indians  carry 
slung  around  their  necks  a  small  embossed  efiigy  representing  one 
of  these  ciusSd  spirits  in  the  ugliest  position  in  which  it  had  ever  put 
in  an  appearance  (RoP,  479). 

93.  The  Island  Arawak  also  had  a  belief  in  certain  supernatural 
beings  or  spirits,  and  possessed  effigies  of  them;  both  the  spirit  and 
its  effigy  were  known  to  these  folk  as  Cemi  or  Zemi.  Thus,  in  his 
account  of  the  aborigines  of  Haiti  (Santo  Domingo) ,  Columbus  says : 

But  also  in  all  the  other  islands  and  on  the  mainland  [Cuba?]  eath  has  a  house  apart 
from  the  village  in  which  there  is  nothing  except  some  wooden  images  carved  in 
relief  which  are  called  Cemis;  nor  is  there  anything  done  in  such  a  house  for  any  other 
object  or  service  except  for  these  Cemis,  by  means  of  a  kind  of  ceremony  and  prayer 


BOTH]  FAMILIAB  SPIRITS  169 

which  they  go  to  make  in  it  as  we  go  to  churches.  In  this  house  they  have  a  finely- 
wrought  table,  round  like  a  wooden  disk,  in  which  is  some  powder  which  is  placed  by 
them  on  the  heads  of  these  Cemis  in  performing  a  certain  ceremony;  then  with  a 
cane  that  has  two  branches  which  they  place  in  their  nostrils  they  snuff  up  this  dust. 
The  words  that  they  say  none  of  our  people  understand.     [WF,  352.] 

In  early  writings,  zemis  are  repeatedjf  called  "messengers"  and 
were  in  fact  subordinates  of  the  great  gods;  being  possessed  like 
them  of  magic  power  to  make  the  yucca  grow,  to  facilitate  childbirth, 
and  to  cure  the  sick  (ibid.,  356). 

93.  These  Cemi  of  the  Island  Arawaks  were  identical  with  the 
Chemin  of  the  island  Carib-owned  women  who,  for  very  intelligible 
reasons,  spoke  an  Arawak  dialect.  StiU  more  interesting  is  the  fact 
that,  on  the  Guiana  mainland,  the  Arawak  designation  both  of  the 
piai  and  of  the  various  kickshaws  and  apparatus  employed  in  the  pur- 
suit of  his  craft  is  Semi-tchihi,  or  Semi-sihi.  Indeed,  it  is  in  the  cult 
of  the  piai  where  traces  of  this  beMef  in  Familiar  Spirits  must  be 
sought  among  the  mainland  tribes,  and  it  is  here  where  I  have  been 
fortunate  enough  to  find  some.  Thus,  the  efl&gy  of  the  Famihar 
Spirit  of  the  islanders  has  its  representative  in  the  so-called  doll 
(Sect.  290)  and  neck-ornament  (Sect.  292)  of  the  Mainland  Arawak 
and  Warrau  medicine-man,  as  weU  as  in  the  "devil "-figure  of  the 
Galibi  piai  (Sect.  311)  and  possibly  in  the  maize-straw  figure  described 
by  Cr6vaux  (Sect.  311).  The  Spirit  itself  is  met  with  in  the  beings 
invoked  by  the  Mainland  Carib  doctor  when  called  upon  to  treat  a 
patient  (Sect.  309) :  it  is  indeed  not  so  very  improbable  that  the 
actual  Island  Carib  term  Icheiri  (Sect.  89)  may  be  identical  with  the 
Mainland  Carib  word  lakai-a  used  today  on  the  Pomeroon. 

93A.  While  frankly  admitting  that  I  have  no  actual  proof  from 
the  literature  or  from  my  own  field-work,  as  to  any  relationship  of  the 
Familiar  Spirit  with  the  little  Baby  Spuit,  on  whose  accoimt  the 
various  forms  of  couvade  are  practised  (Sects.  281-283),  I  am  never- 
theless very  much  inchned  to  beheve  in  their  identity.  I  look  on 
the  Familiar  Spirit  as  an  early  stage  in  the  idea  of  the  Conscious  Self, 
the  "Ego." 


Chapter  VIII 

THE  SPflllTS  OF  THE  BUSH 

Natural  History 

Various  names  applied  (94);  the  Yawahu — Tukuyuha,  Dai-dai,  etc.,  general 
appearance  (95),  and  special  association  with  the  silk-cotton  tree  (96);  Ekkekuli 
and  Mansinsldri  (97);  an  unusual  form  of  Bush  Spirit  (98);  the  Hebu  (99);  the 
-  tnunawari  (100);  the  Yurokon,  etc.  (101).  But  Bush  Spirits  may  be  zoomorphic — 
able  to  change  into  animals,  aa  Tigers,  Goat-suckers  (10$,  lOS).  They  can  be  recog- 
nized by  Sound  (104)  or  by  Smell  (105). 

They  are  very  shrewd;  can  bring  the  dead  to  life,  and  render  themselves  invisible 
(106);  may  occasionally  do  kindnesses  to  people  (107),  but  generally  prefer  mischief, 
though  this  may  be  due  to  the  Indians'  own  fault  (108);  they  cause  all  the  mishaps 
and  accidents  of  daily  life  (109) — damage  crops,  raise  disputes,  bring  death  and  sick- 
ness, produce  transformations  (110-115);  they  are  excellent  himteis  (116). 

They  are  fond  of  women,  human  flesh,  and  children  at  the  breast  (117-1110),  and 
of  tobacco  (121-m);  are  usually  of  abnormally  large  size  (liS);  shrink  from  exposure 
of  all  descriptions;  as  to  daylight,  or  in  connection  with  name  or  origin  (1!S4);  can  not 
endure  being  mimicked  or  chaffed  (1^5). 

It  is  best  to  leave  these  Bush  Spirits  strictly  to  themselves,  as  they  bring  only 
harm  in  the  long  run  (12G-lt8);  if  circumstances  force  one  into  their  company, 
measmes  can  be  taken  to  rid  the  house  and  neighborhood  of  them  (129);  also  the 
road  when  one  is  traveling  (ISO). 

94.  Those  Spirits  whicli,  emanating  from  the  human  corpse,  ulti- 
mately find  a  resting  place  in  the  tree,  field,  forest,  or  bush,  are  known 
collectively  as  Forest  Spirits  or  Bush  Spirits.  But  let  us  not  forget 
that  certain  of  the  Bush  Spirits  may  arise  from  the  dead  bodies  of 
animals  and  birds,  and  may  even  develop  spontaneously.  The 
generic  term  appHed  to  them  varies  with  the  tribes :  thus,  in  Cayenne 
there  is  Hyorokon  (GaHbi)  or  Hyrouca  (LAP,  ii,  223),  Amignao  and 
Anaanh  (Arroua),  Maboya  (Carib)  (PBa,  206)  and  Yolok  (Carib); 
in  British  Guiana,  Yawahu  (Arawak),  Hebo  or  Hebu  (Warrau), 
Yurokon  (Carib),  and  Immawari  (Akawai);  on  the  upper  Orinoco, 
the  Atabapo,  Inirida,  and  Guainia  (i.  e.,  upper  Rio  Negro),  it  is 
lolok-iamo  (AVH,  ii,  362,  385) ;  on  the  Aiary  River,  lya-imi  (Siusi) 
(KG,  I,  113);  on  the  Orinoco,  Tanasimi  (Achagua),  Memelii  (Betoyes, 
Jiraras),  and  Duati  (Guajivas)  (G,  ii,  24);  on  the  Amazons,  Cay- 
por  (HWB,  279),  Cvirupari  (ibid.,  36),  and  Jurupari  (ibid.,  381), 
but  this  word  is  said  to  be  Lingoa  Geral  (KG,  i,  113).  It  will  be 
noticed  how  the  term  Yurokon,  in  the  form  of  Hyorokon,  Hyrouca, 
Yolok,  lolok-iamo,  lya-imi,  is  spread  throughout  the  extent  of  the 
Guianas,  while  in  the  form  of  Juluca  (Sect.  216)  it  is  met  with  on 
the  islands,  as  the  personification  of  the  Rainbow.  I  have  also 
170 


BOTH]  THE   SPIBITS  OF  THE   BUSH  171 

shown  the  probability  of  its  identity  with  the  Shadow  Spirit  (Sect. 
68).  Equally  striking  is  its  resemblance  to  the  word  Huracan,  the 
name  given  by  the  Aztecs  to  the  autumnal  equinox  (Cordonazo  de 
San  Francisco).  Huracan  means  the  Spirit  (corazon)  of  the  Sea, 
the  Spirit  of  Heaven  and  Earth:  the  Nahuas  were  unable  to  con- 
ceive of  the  author  of  the  universe  except  in  a  cataclysm.  Cyclone, 
Hurricane,  or  Cordonazo  de  San  Francisco  are  names  of  the  same 
phenomenon.  Hurakan  of  the  Quiche  myths  is  the  Kukulcan  of 
the  Maya,  the  Quetzalcouatl  (moming-star)  of  Mexican  mythology. 
Yawahu,  the  Arawak  generic  term,  includes  the  Tu-kuyuha,  the 
EkkekuH  or  Manahau,  and  the  Mansinskiri  Spirits,  the  Tu-kuyuha 
being  subdivided  into  Konoko-(Tu)kujTiha  and  Adda-(Tu)kuyuha, 
according  as  they  are  more  specially  associated  with  the  bush  and 
forest,  or  trees,  respectively. 

95.  Each  tribe  seems  to  exhibit  variations  in  the  ideas  held  as  to 
the  form,  shape,  and  pecuHarities  assumed  by  its  respective  Bush 
Spirits.  Of  some  of  these  I  am  a"ble  to  furnish  the  following  particu- 
lars :  Starting  with  the  Arawak  Yawahus,  there  are  the  Tukuyuhas, 
the  Konoko  variety  of  which  are  spoken  of  by  the  Akawai  as  Arai-dai 
or  Dai-Dai,  and  by  the  Creoles  of  the  Colony  as  "Bush  devils."  An 
Arawak  woman  told  me  that  such  Spirits  are  hairy  people  having  so 
much  hair  that  one  can  not  see  their  faces.  They  Uve  underground 
in  the  forest;  they  may  be  men  or  women;  they  are  met  vnih  sud- 
denly, but  may  often  give  a  premonitory  sign  or  token  of  their 
coming.  The  token  varies  greatly,  and  even  when  taken  note  of  is 
usually  recognized  only  after  the  event  of  which  it  has  given  warn- 
ing has  taken  place  (Sect.  S20  et  seq.).  Having  no  bows  and  arrows, 
these  Spirits  are  accustomed  to  fight  only  with  their  limbs,  so  that 
when  an  Indian  has  been  attacked  and  returns  home,  where  he  is 
sure  to  die  shortly  after,  no  marks  will  be  found  on  his  body.  Some- 
times the  Konoko-(Tu)kuyuha  will  not  even  allow  the  victim  to 
return  alive,  but  will  eat  him,  causing  him  to  disappear  totally;  the 
friends  and  relatives  never  see  any  further  signs  of  him.  The  attack 
may  be  made  at  any  time,  day  or  night.  Now,  because  these  beings 
(Sect.  SSI)  have  no  bows,  or  rather  what  bows  they  have  are  broken, 
the  old-time  Arawak  people  used  to  call  them  Shimarabu-akarad&ni 
(lit.,  bows-broken),  and  when  returning  home  from  some  hunting 
or  trading  expedition,  would  sing  out  that  name  before  reaching 
their  houses,  with  the  view  of  preventing  these  undesirable  Spirits 
making  an  entry  (Sect.  1^9). 

96.  The  Adda  variety  of  Tukuyuha  Spirits,  particularly  associated 
with  trees,  are  sometimes  in  the  shape  of  birds :  among  such  notable 
trees  are  the  silk-cotton  {Bomhax  sp.)  and  the  kofa  {Clusia  gravdi- 
flora).  In  Cayenne  it  would  seem  that  the  Hyrouca  [Yurokon]  was 
specially  attached  to   a  tree   known  as  'panacoco    (LAP,  n,  223), 


172  ANIMISM   AND   FOLK-LOBE  OF   GUIANA  INDIANS    [eth.  ann.  30 

which  thus  far  I  have  not  been  able  to  identify.  The  Indian  guide 
breaks  his  arrow  and  asks  pardon  from  the  Spirit  for  his  European 
visitor  having  touched  the  timber  with  unclean  victims — a  fish  and 
an  agouti.* 

97.  When  perceptible  to  humaii  eyes,  the  EkkekuU  or  Manahau 
have  the  appearance  of  black  people  (negroes) :  they  are  of  a  savage 
nature,  killing  Indians,  and  abducting  children.  If  anywhere  in  the 
neighboring  caves  and  gullies  and  their  names  be  loudly  called 
in  the  forest,  they  will  materiahze.  The  Mansinskiri  (Arawak),  or 
Maihisikiri  (Warrau)  is  a  particular  Yawahu  wandering  about  the 
bush,  and  in  and  among  the  trees,  of  which  the  native  women,  sub- 
sequent to  certain  regular  occasions,  have  to  be  especially  careful. 
Such  Spirits  can  assume  the  identical  material  appearance  of  their 
real  husbands  or  lovers,  but  woe  betide  those  poor  women  who  yield 
to  their  solicitations,  for  they  will  surely  die  in  a  few  days.  On  the 
other  hand,  provided  the  woman  is  shrewd  enough,  she  can  invari- 
ably teU  whether  she  is  dealing  with  the  real  man  or  not — she  has 
only  to  look  at  the  left  foot;  in  the  case  of  a  spirit  wooer,  this  is 
always  minus  the  big  toe.  During  February,  1910,  an  Indian  came 
and  gave  me  particulars  of  his  wife's  death,  with  detaOs  as  to  name, 
place,  and  surrounding  circumstances.  The  wife  had  been  out  getting 
firewood  in  the  bush,  and  had  unexpectedly  met  what  she  had  beheved 
to  be  her  husband.  When  she  got  home  there  was  her  husband  lying 
in  his  hammock ;  she  expressed  surprise  at  seaing  him,  still  more  so 
when  he  assured  her  that  he  had  not  been  away  from  the  house  that 
day.  Like  a  good  wife,  she  told  him  what  had  happened  to  her. 
Within  the  week  the  woman  died. 

97A.  The  Maihisikiri  Changes  the  Woman  into  a  Bush 

Spirit  (W) 

A  man  -went  out  hunting,  leaving  his  wife  behind  by  herself.  It  was  then  that  a 
Maihisikiri  appeared,  and  believing  it  to  be  her  husband,  the  woman  allowed  him 
to  act  like  one,  but  he  went  away  shortly  before  the  time  for  her  real  husband  to  arrive. 
The  same  thing  happened  on  a  second  and  a  third  occasion,  but  on  the  last  visit,  know- 
ing that  her  husband  had  gone  to  a  distant  locality,  she  expressed  her  doubts  by  asking 
Maihisikiri,  "How  can  you  be  my  husband?  he  is  gone  far  away. "  It  was  only  then 
that  he  admitted  who  he  really  was,  a  Bush  Spirit  in  her  husband's  likeness,  and  he 
told  her  to  come  away  with  him.  AVhen  the  real  husband  returned,  the  house  was 
empty,  and  no  wife  visible,  but  he  could  hear  her  laughing  in  the  distance,  and 
approaching  the  spot  found  her,  prostrate,  still  laughing.  She  was  laughing  because 
the  Maihisikiri  was  sporting  with  her :  her  husband  of  course  could  not  see  the  Spirit  for 
the  reason  that  he  was  invisible  to  the  male  sex.  Now,  when  he  seized  his  wife's  arm 
to  drag  her  home,  it  was  all  soft,  with  no  bones  in  it,  and  then  feeling  her  all  over 
realized  that  she  had  not  a  single  bone  in  her  body,  which  was  all  soft.  Returning 
home,  he  waited  a  while,  and  then  returned  a  second  time  to  fetch  her;  but  she  was 
still  all  flesh  and  skin,  and  so  he  left  her  severely  alone.     All  she  could  say  to  him  was : 

1  Further  details  of  this  and  similar  association  will  be  discussed  in  connection  with  plants  (Chap.  X). 


BOTH]  THE   SPIRITS   OF   THE  BUSH  173 

"I  do  not  really  want  to  leave  you,  husband,  but  the  Maihisikiri  is  too  strong  for  me. 
I  am  now  a  Bush  Spirit.  And  though  you  must  not  be  sorry  for  me,  I  am  indeed 
Borry  for  you,  for  you  will  have  to  die  before  you  can  become  one. " 

98.  An  unusual  form  of  Arawak  Bush  Spirit  is  that  of  the  scrub- 
turkey  (Tinamus  sp.) — a  woman's  leg:  there  are  several  references, 
however,  to  a  leg  in  the  folk-lore  (Sects.  S8,  208,  362).  The  connec- 
tion between  this  astral  limb  and  the  bird  under  consideration  is  that 
when  the  "leg"  is  above  the  horizon  just  before  daybreak,  then  will 
the  scrub-turkey's  "call"  be  heard.' 

The  Man  Who  Always  Hunted  Scrub-Turkey  (A) 

There  was  a  man  celebrated  for  his  skill  in  hunting  "maam"  (Tinamus  sp.);  he 
would  regularly  bring  home  four  or  five  of  these  scrub-turkeys,  and  people  warned  him 
that  if  he  continued  in  this  way  he  would  get  into  trouble  with  the  maam 's  ' "  mother, ' ' 
(i.  e.,  Spirit),  for  killing  so  many  of  her  brood  (Sect.  242).  But  he  did  not  care,  and 
went  on  destroying  the  birds  in  the  same  wasteful  manner.  On  one  occasion  he 
stayed  out  later  than  usual,  waiting  to  see  on  which  particular  trees  the  maams  were 
going  to  roost.  He  could  hear  their  peculiar  call  in  all  directions  around;  indeed, 
the  birds  were  so  plentiful  about,  that  he  was  somewhat  at  a  loss  to  know  which  par- 
ticular one  to  follow.  However,  he  proceeded  to  track  one,  but  the  farther  he  went, 
the  farther  off  sounded  the  note,  until  at  last  he  found  himself  deep  in  the  forest. 
As  night  was  beginning  to  fall,  he  had  to  hurry  home,  not  daring  to  remain  out  in  the 
dark  for  fear  of  the  Yawahu  (Spirit  of  the  Bush)  catching  him.  The  same  thing 
happened  next  day;  he  heard  many  birds  calling,  and,  following  one,  again  found 
himself  deep  in  the  forest,  but  this  time  he  succeeded  finally  in  coming  up  with  the 
quarry.  Locating  the  tree,  he  peered  in  among  the  branches  to  see  where  the  bird 
was  "hollo"-ing,  but  could  see  only  a  woman's  leg.  Recognizing  this  to  be  the 
Arch  Spirit  of  the  maams  (Sect.  210),  he  took  careful  aim,  and  shot  an  arrow  right  into 
the  center  of  the  foot.  The  leg  fell  down,  and  directly  it  touched  ground,  changed 
into  an  extraordinarily  big  scrub-turkey,  which  he  immediately  killed  and  carried 
home.  There  his  friends  knew  it  at  once  to  be  the  maam'e  "mother"  (Spirit),  and 
advised  him  to  cook  and  eat  the  whole  of  it  himself,  and  not  gi^•e  away  even  the 
smallest  particle  of  it.  He  did  what  was  advised,  and  in  subsequently  hunting  for 
maam  he  was  invariably  even  more  successful  than  before.  And  now  that  he  had 
destroyed  the  maam-Spirit,  he  was  not  afraid  of  killing  as  many  birds  as  he  liked. 

99.  The  Hebus  are  more  or  less  hairy  beings,  recognizable  in  a 
near  view  by  the  absence  of  buttocks,  their  place  being  taken  by  a 
fire-hearth,  with  glowing  embers,  giving  rise  to  the  name  Huta- 
kurakura,  "Red-back,"  which  is  often  applied  to  these  folk  (Sects. 
21,  27).  Another  peculiarity  they  possess  is  the  extraordinary  promi- 
nence of  the  eye-brows  (supra-orbital  region),  which  prevents  them 
having  a  look  at  the  skies  except  when  standing  on  their  heads  (Sect. 
22).  Perhaps  this  conception  is  a  survival  of  the  custom  of  artificial 
head-compression  which  certainly  used  to  be  practised  in  the  Guianas. 
As  is  the  case  witli  the  Yurokons,  Hebus  may  sometimes  appear  in  the 
form  of  skulls  or  skeletons  (Sect.  26).  Like  all  other  Forest  Spirits 
they  have  strong  patriarchal  tendencies.  They  seem  to  be  specially 
distinguished  by  the  size  of  their  pui-ses  [scrotums]. 

1  Compare  a  similar  connection  between  the  powis  and  the  Southern  Cross  (Sect.  tOe). 


174  ANIMISM  AND  FOLK-LOEE  OF  GUIANA  INDIANS   [bth.  ann.  30 

The  Shrewd  Little  Boy  and  the  Hebtt  (W) 

A  woman,  having  to  go  to  make  starch  out  of  the  ite  (Mauritia)  tree,  left  her  little 
children,  two  girls,  behind  the  house.  While  she  was  away  Kau-nassa,  a  Bush  Spirit, 
came  along,  disguised  as  their  old  grandmother,  and  said,  "Come  along,  my  little 
girls.  I  will  take  you  to  your  mother."  But  instead  of  doing  that,  the  Hebu  led 
them  away  far  into  the  bush,  till  they  reached  a  creek  where  the  old  woman  sat  down 
and  made  a  basket.  When  it  was  completed,  she  told  the  youngsters  to  get  inside; 
once  they  were  in,  she  closed  the  top,  and  threw  it  into  the  water,  where  the  children 
were  soon  drowned.  Kau-nassa  then  went  to  another  house,  where  a  little  boy  and  girl 
had  been  left  in  charge  during  their  parents'  absence  and,  similarly  disguised  as  their 
grandmother,  repeated  her  story.  She  led  the  children  as  before  to  the  creek,  where 
she  proposed  making  another  basket,  and  they  started  playing  around  her.  "You 
children,"  she  said,  "must  not  play  behind  my  back.  Play  in  front  of  me  where  I 
can  see  you."  Now  the  very  fact  of  being  told  not  to  go  behind  her  made  the  boy 
all  the  more  anxious  to  do  what  had  been  forbidden.  So  while  playing  in  front  with 
his  sister,  he  made  an  excuse  to  slip  away  behind,  and  then  he  saw  the  lower  part  of 
the  old  woman's  back,  which  was  all  aglow  with  the  fire  that  she  carried  there.  He 
now  knew  that  she  was  a  Hebu,  and  getting  back  to  his  little  sister,  carried  her  home. 
But  before  going  he  called  out,  Kau-nassa!  Kau-nassa!  So  angered  and  dismayed  was 
the  Spirit  at  being  discovered  and  hearing  her  name  called  (Sect.  1^4)  that  she  burst 
iiito  wind  and  flame  and  flew  away. 

100.  Of  the  Immawari  I  can  not  get  much  information,  there  being 
few  reliable  old  Akawai  in  my  district:  on  the  authority  of  Warraus, 
however,  these  Spirits  have  two  immense  teeth  protruding  from  their 
stomachs.  Had  elephants  roamed  the  country  within  recent  geolog- 
ical periods,  one  could  perhaps  have  obtained  an  insight  into  the 
origin  of  so  extraordinary  a  belief:  on  the  other  hand  it  is  possible 
that  it  may  be  an  idea  borrowed  from  the  African  (Sect.  113). 

101.  So  also  with  the  Yurokons.  Alllcangleanis  that,  in  common 
with  the  other  Forest  Spirits,  the  face,  body,  and  limbs  are  covered 
with  a  luxuriant  growth  of  hair.  As  to  the  Caypor,  a  kind  of  sylvan 
deity  similar  to  the  Curupira,  the  belief  in  this  being  seems  to  be 
common  to  all  the  tribes  of  the  Tupi  stock:  according  to  the  figure 
they  dressed  up  at  Ega  (upper  Amazon)  he  is  a  bulky  misshapen 
monster  with  red  skin  and  long  shaggy  red  hair  hanging  halfway 
down  his  back  (HWB,  279).  The  Curupari  (Jurupari,  or  Demon) 
is  a  mysterious  being  whose  attributes  are  uncertain,  for  they  vary 
according  to  locahty:  sometimes  he  is  described  as  a  kind  of  orang- 
outang, covered  with  long  shaggy  hair  and  living  in  trees ;  at  others 
he  is  said  to  have  cloven  feet  and  a  bright-red  face  ...  he  some- 
times comes  down  to  the  rocas  to  steal  the  mandioca  (HWB,  36). 
On  the  upper  Aiary  Kiver  (Rio  Negro)  the  bad  forest  demon  is  a 
bearded  dwarf:  he  jeers  the  hunters  and  drives  away  the  quarry  from 
right  under  their  very  noses.  At  times,  he  kills  people  with  his  poi- 
soned arrows  (KG,  i,  137). 

103.  But  the  Spirits  of  the  Forest  need  not  necessarily  be  anthro- 
pomorphic. They  may  take  the  likeness  of  animals  (e.  g.,  "tigers," 
birds),  an  especially  favored  feathered  form  being  the  goat-sucker 


BOTH]  THE   SPIRITS   OF  THE  BUSH  175 

(Caprimulgus).  These  physical  attributes  of  some  particular  creature 
or  other  they  may  permanently  retain,  or  on  occasion  discard,  as 
when  playing  the  r6le  of  a  Jcanaima,  or  blood-avenger.  At  the  head 
of  the  Arapu  River  near  Roraima  "in  traversing  the  country  between 
Waetipu  and  Ipelemouta  ...  we  were  startled  by  a  most  singular 
prolonged  cry.  .  .  .  The  Indians  .  .  .  said  that  the  sound  must 
have  proceeded  from  some  Arecuna  who,  having  killed  one  of  his 
own  people,  had  been  turned  into  a  wild  animal"  (Bro,  123).  Among 
the  Trios  of  Surinam  certain  of  these  Spirits  are  Akalamano,  the 
carrion-vulture  (Sarcorhamphus) ;  Soni,  a  kind  of  vulture  or  falcon, 
etc.  As  with  animals,  so  in  the  case  of  birds,  those  of  them  which 
are  Bush  Spirits  bent  oh  inflicting  punishment,  in  the  way  of  blood 
revenge  or  otherwise,  upon  poor  mortal  man,  may  be  kUled  by  him 
with  impunity.  "One  small  bird  which  in  the  early  morning  and  in 
the  evening  flits,  with  a  peculiar  and  shrill  whistle,  over  the  savannahs 
and  sometimes  approaches  the  Indian  settlements,  is  looked  upon 
with  especial  distrust.  When  one  of  these  is  shot,  the  Indians  sup- 
pose that  they  have  one  enemy  less,  and  they  burn  it,  taldng  great 
care  that  not  even  a  single  feather  escapes  to  be  blown  about  by  the 
wind;  on  a  windy  day  on  the  savannahs  I  have  seen  upwards  of  a 
dozen  men  and  women  eagerly  chasing  single  floating  feathers  of 
these  birds"  (IT,  332).  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  certain  birds — 
owls,  goat-suckers,  and  others  (undoubtedly  Bush  Spirits  in  the 
sense  that  they  have  been  derived  from  human  beings) — which  must 
not  be  killed  under  any  pretence  whatever.  Such  birds  do  not  wish 
to  injure  "we  Indians,"  but  they  often  come  to  give  us  a  warning  or 
token.  "You  will  never  persuade  the  negro  to  destroy  these  birds 
[goat-suckers],  or  get  the  Indian  to  let  fly  his  arrow  at  them.  .  .  . 
They  are  receptacles  for  departed  souls,  who  come  back  again  to 
earth,  unable  to  rest  for  crimes  done  in  their  days  of  nature;  or  they 
are  expressly  sent  by  Jumbo,  or  Yabahou  [Yawahu],  to  haunt  cruel 
and  hard-hearted  masters,  and  retahate  injuries  received  from 
them.  ...  If  it  be  heard  close  to  the  negro's  or  Indian's  hut,  from 
that  night  misfortune  sits  brooding  over  it;  and  they  await  the  event 
in  terrible  suspense"  (W,  177).  Reference  has  already  been  made 
to  the  "souls"  of  people  departed  being  changed  into  goat-suckers 
in  the  cavern  of  Guacharo  (Sect.  8S). 

103.  The  following  legend,  current  among  both  Caribs  and  Arawaks, 
is  of  special  interest  in  that  the  bird  in  question  is  derived  from  the 
head  of  the  Spirit  itself: 

The  Spirit's  Brain  and  the  Goat-Sucker  (A) 

A  man  went  out  hunting  for  land  crab,  and  was  waiting  for  the  rain  to  fall,  because 
it  ia  only  under  this  condition  that  the  animal  creeps  out  of  its  hole  into  the  swamps. 
Now,  when  the  rain  fell,  it  wet  his  hair;  to  protect  himself,  the  huntsman,  using  his 


176  ANIMISM   AKD   FOLK-LOBE   OF   GUIANA   INDIANS    [eth.  a.nx.  30 

calabash  like  a  cap,  pressed  it  firmly  down  upon  his  head,  so  that  but  a  little  of  the 
hair  projected  from  beneath  its  circumference.  Just  then  a  Konoko-kuyuha  put  in 
an  appearance,  and  seeing  the  man  in  this  guise,  and  not  knowing  what  it  was,  could 
not  help  exclaiming,  "AMiat  a  fine  smooth  head  you  have!  How  did  you  manage 
to  get  it?  "'  The  man  told  him  that  he  had  just  taken  a  knife  and  cut  his  head  all 
the  way  round,  and  that  if  he  wished  he  would  gladly  do  the  same  for  him.  The 
Spirit  was  delighted,  and  allowed  the  skin  all  round  his  head  to  be  cut,  and  peppers 
to  be  rubbed  over  the  raw  surface  to  make  it  heal  tlie  quicker;  the  latter  process, 
however,  caused  him  to  groan  in  pain,  but  by  this  time  the  huntsman  had  quietly 
slipped  out  of  sight.^  A  long  time  afterward,  many  years  in  fact,  the  same  man, 
going  out  into  the  bush  close  to  the  neighborhood  where  the  above  event  had  occurred, 
met  the  same  Konoko-kuyuha,  whom  he  recognized  by  the  peppers  on  his  head, 
which  had  grown  into  big  bushes.  The  recognition  was  mutual,  and  the  Spirit  re- 
proached him  after  this  manner:  "You  are  the  man  who  peeled  off  my  head.  I  will 
kill  you."  But  the  man  replied:  "No.  You  are  mistaken.  The  person  who  really 
did  it  has  been  dead  a  long  time.  Come  with  me  and  I  will  show  you  his  bones."  And 
he  led  him  to  a  place  where  there  was  a  stack  of  deer  bones.  These  the  Spirit  took  up 
and  threw  one  by  one  into  his  waiyarri.  He  then  said  to  the  man,  "Let  us  dance,  and 
make  his  bones  rattle."  Whereupon  they  both  started  dancing,  and  while  dancing 
they  sang;  the  song  of  the  Spirit  was  "Bassana!  Bassana!  [lit.  meaning  unknown.]  It 
was  you  that  peeled  my  head.  It  was  you  that  punished  me.  How  do  you  like  to 
hear  your  own  bones  rattUng  for  music?"  After  a  time,  the  man  remarked,  "This  is 
not  a  good  place  to  dance.  Come  over  there  where  I  can  see  a  fine  flat  baking-stone 
that  will  suit  better.''  So  they  shifted  their  quarters,  and  the  Spirit  recommenced 
dancing  on  the  flat  stone.  "Bend  your  head  lower,"  said  the  man,  "you  are 
not  doing  the  figiu-e  properly."  So  the  Spirit  bent  his  head  lower,  but  his  com- 
panion told  him  that  even  this  was  not  low  enough;  so  he  tried  again,  and  directly  he 
had  bent  his  head  quite  close  to  the  stone  upon  which  he  was  dancihg,  the  man  sud- 
denly crushed  it  thereon.  The  Spirit's  brains  thus  were  scattered,  and  from  each  piece 
there  'grew'  a  wokorai-yu  (goat-sucker).  This  is  why  we  Indians  always  dread  these 
birds,  and  leave  them  severely  alone;  they  come  from  the  Spirits  of  the  Bush,  and 
give  us  warning  of  evil — a  toten  that  we  may  expect  trouble  of  various  sorts.' 

104.  Speaking  generally,  the  Spirits  of  the  Forest  can  be  recog- 
nized, even  when  invisible,  by  means  of  the  whistling  sound  which 
they  make.  "  The  first  night  after  leaving  Peaimah  [Mazaruni  River] 
we  heard  a  long,  loud,  and  most  melancholy  whistle,  proceeding  from 
the  direction  of  the  depths  of  the  forest,  at  which  some  of  the  men 
exclaimed,  in  an  awed  tone  of  voice,  'The  Didi'  [Dai-dai].  Two  or 
three  times  the  whistle  was  repeated,  sounding  like  that  made  by  a 
human  being,  beginning  in  a  high  key,  and  dying  slowly  .and  gradu- 
ally away  in  a  low  one"  (Bro,  87).  But  instead  of  a  whistle  (Sect. 
118)  they  may  indicate  their  presence  by  a  noise  somewhat  like  the 
neighing  of  a  horse,  in  places  where  horses  are  known  not  to  exist. 


1  Baldness  is  practically  imknown  among  the  Indians;  thus  far  I  have  not  come  across  any  record  of  its 
occurrence. — W.  E.  R. 

!  This  is  the  first  and  only  reference  to  scalping  that  has  been  met  with  in  Guiana  folk-lore.  Scalping  was 
practised  both  in  the  Guianas  and  elsewhere  in  South  America,  for  example,  in  Ecuador  (AS,  90). 

s  Brett's  version  (BrB,  176)  is  as  follows:  Peaima  was  an  Arai-daiwho  had  become  dissatisfied  with  his 
coarse  and  matted  locks  and  wished  them  to  be  made  like  those  of  human  beings.  Pahadun,  a  captive 
undertook  to  gratify  him;  he  shaved  his  head  close,  and  on  the  raw  surface  poured  pepper  seeds.  Thus 
crowned  with  pepper  seeds,  the  monster  tried  to  slay  the  man  in  a  long  series  of  adventures  but  the 
man  with  lying  tongue  outwitted  his  pursuer. 


BOTH]  THE  SPIRITS  OF  THE  BUSH  177 

They  are  then  described  as  Kawaiho-Kuyuha,  evidently  so  called  from 
the  corrupted  Spanish  form  cdbdUo,  and  w-ith  anthropophagous  tastes 
have  unconquerable  attraction  toward  infant  at  the  breast  and 
women  encientes  (Da,  183).  The  Hebus,  after  dark,  make  sudden 
sharp  noises  like  the  sounds  caused  by  the  breaking  of  branches :  as 
stated  elsewhere  (Sect.  19),  "You  can  always  distinguish  a  Spirit's 
road  from  any  other  pathway  in  the  forest,  because  the  Hebus  occu- 
pying the  trees  that  lie  aloi^ide  it  are  always,  especially  at  night, 
striking  the  branches  and  trunks,  and  so  producing  sharp  crackling 
noises. "  Of  course,  in  the  case  of  Bush  Spirits  that  are  zoomorphic 
the  sounds  they  make  depend  on  the  nature  of  the  particular  animal 
whose  form  they  have  assvuned.  The  Caribs  in  the  Pomeroon  plant 
a  certain  species  of  caladium  in  the  neighborhood  of  their  settlement, 
to  give  warning  of  the  approach  of  a  Yurokon  at  night :  the  plant 
gives  a  double  signal,  a  soft  yet  high-pitched  whistling  sound,  and  at 
the  same  time  somehow  contrives  to  shake  the  hammock  with  force 
sufficient  to  wake  the  sleeper  and  warn  him  of  the  coming  danger. 
The  following  extract  is  from  Bates,  with  reference  to  the  lower 
Amazon:  "At  one  time  I  had  a  Mameluco  youth  in  my  service  .  .  . 
he  always  went  with  me  in  the  forest :  in  fact  I  could  not  get  him  to 
go  alone,  and  whenever  he  heard  any  of  the  strange  noises  mentioned 
above  [due  to  the  Curupira]  he  used  to  tremble  with  fear"  (ITWB,  36). 
Dance  (262)  writes  on  this  same  subject  of  what  the  duties  of  a  trav- 
eler are,  and  how  the  influences  of  evil  Bush  Spirits  may  be  avoided 

(Sect,  im- 

105.  Bush  Spirits  may  also  be  recognized  through  the  sense  of 
smell.  "  When  the  Island  Caribs  smell  something  offensive  in  a  place, 
they  will  say  'The  Evil  Spirit  (Maboya)  is  here:  let  us  therefore  go 
away.'  .  .  .  They  also  give  the  name  of  Maboya  to  certain  plants, 
to  toadstools,  of  a  bad  odor,  and  to  everything  that  is  capable  of 
imparting  dread  to  them"  (RoP,  464).  The  Pomeroon  Arawaka 
have  the  same  idea. 

106.  Bush  Spirits  are  certainly  very  clever  people;  nothing  comes 
amiss  to  them,  and  tbiey  can  even  bring  the  dead  to  life.  They  may 
render  themselves  invisible  (Sect.  119). 

The  MuTiLATEr)  Hcsbaxd  is  Mvde  Whole  (W) 

There  being  nothing  to  do  in  the  field,  a  man  told  his  wife  one  day  that  he  was  going 
to  another  village  to  do  some  work  for  the  headman.  She  said  she  would  accompany 
him,  but  he  explained  that  this  was  impossible  as  there  were  only  men  there.  How- 
ever, she  was  so  importunate,  that  although  it  was  quite  contrary  to  his  own  wishes, 
he  yielded  to  her  entreaties,  and  took  her.  But  he  insisted  on  her  traveling  in  male 
attire.  She  therefore  cut  her  hair  short,  hid  her  breasts  by  means  of  numerous  cotton 
and  hog-tooth  neck-chains,  and  covered  hw  nakedness  with  a  strip  of  bark.  When 
they  reached  the  settlement,  they  started  work  in  company  with  all  the  other  men, 
and  as  soon  as  the  day's  work  was  done,  they  all  wentdown  to  the  riverside  to  bathe. 

15961  ° — 30  ETH — 15 12 


178  ANIMISM  AND  FOLK-LOBE  OF  GUIANA  INDIANS   [bth.  ann.  30 

The  woman  was  at  a  loss  to  know  what  to  do:  she  was  alarmed  at  the  prospect  of 
exposure  and  yet  did  not  want  to  draw  too  much  attention  to  herself.  All  she 
could  do  was  to  wait  until  the  others  had  finished  and  then  bathe  alone.  This  went  on 
for  some  days,  until  the  others  remarked  upon  it,  wondering  why  the  new-comer  would 
never  go  into  the  water  with  them,  but  always  waited  until  they  had  finished  bathing. 
Two  of  them  accordingly  set  watch,  and  as  a  result  discovered  that  it  was  a  woman  who 
had  come  among  them.  They  thereupon  determined  on  kilUng  the  husband  so 
as  to  secure  possession  of  the  wife.  They  tried  twice,  but  on  each  occasion  something 
went  wrong  with  their  plans.  The  third  time,  they  tied  him  in  a  corial  and  let  it 
drift  out  to  sea,  but  the  sea  cast  it  back  on  sliore,  where  a  tiger,  scenting  him,  gnawed 
through  the  ropes,  and  set  Tiim  free.  Tiger  did  not,  however,  go  to  all  this  trouble  for 
the  sake  of  kindness,  but  for  pure  selfishness,  telling  his  captive  that  he  now  intended 
punishing  him.  "Don't  do  that, "  pleaded  the  man,  "haven't  I  been  punished 
enough  in  losing  my  wife? "  This  was  but  reasonable,  and  Tiger  let  him  go.  The 
man  then  walked  along  the  shore  a  good  distance,  until  he  came  to  a  house,  which  he 
was  afraid  to  enter;  but  the  house-master  bade  him  welcome,  provided  him  with  a 
stool  to  sit  on,  and  with  food  to  eat.  Having  been  asked  what  he  was  doing,  and 
whither  he  was  going,  the  wanderer  related  how  he  had  been  robbed  of  his  wife,  what 
he  had  suffered  on  her  account,  and  that  he  intended  seeking  her.  Now,  the  house- 
master was  really  a  Spirit,  and  knew  perfectly  that  what  had  been  narrated  was  the 
truth.  He  told  the  man  to  shut  his  eyes,  and  when  he  opened  them  again,  a  third 
person,  another  Spirit,  was  present.  "Go  with  this  friend,"  said  the  house-master, 
"and  you  will  find  your  wife. "  So  they  went,  and  traveled  far,  and  eventually  came 
to  a  house,  where  they  slung  their  hanmiocks  and  rested.  In  the  meantime,  the  wife 
had  been  taken  possession  of  by  a  "keeper, "  and  was  living  in  the  near  neighborhood. 
The  guilty  couple  used  to  pass  regularly  the  very  house  where  the  husband  was  resting, 
and  when  the  wife  saw  him  she  exclaimed,  "Look!  there  is  my  husband,"  but  the 
keeper  said  that  it  could  not  be,  because  he  had  been  tied  inside  a  corial  and  allowed 
to  drift  out  to  sea.  However,  to  make  sure,  they  went  in,  and  when  they  recognized 
the  husband,  they  chopped  him  up  with  an  ax.  But  the  Spirit  friend  restored  him 
to  life,  and  when  the  wicked  people  passed  again  next  day,  the  wife  exclaimed  as 
before,  "Look!  there  is  my  husband!"  So  they  killed  him  a  second  time,  but  the 
Spirit  again  made  him  whole.  And  the  couple  passed  the  house  a  third  time,  and 
just  the  same  thing  happened,  except  that  the  keeper  burned  the  body,  and  scattered 
the  ashes.  This,  however,  made  no  difference,  because  the  Spirit  collected  the  ashes 
together  in  a  palm  leaf,  and  made  them  into  a  living  person  again.  The  resurrected 
husband,  acting  under  advice,  then  went  and  destroyed  his  faithless  wife  as  well  as  her 
paramour :  their  friends  and  relatives  tried  to  piece  the  bits  together,  and  ' '  make  them 
alive,"  but  this  they  could  not  do.    It  is  only  Spirits  who  can  do  such  things. 

107.  Certain  of  the  Forest  Spirits  have  come  from  the  bodies  of 
old-time  medicine-men :  the  present-day  celebrant  invokes  them  with 
his  rattle  (Sect.  309) .  Such  Spirits  may  be  considered  beneficent  in 
the  sense  of  assisting  the  piai  by  giving  him  information  concerning 
the  source  of  the  illness  from  which  his  patient  is  suffering,  and  in  other 
ways.  Evidently  others  have  been  kindly  disposed  occasionally,  in 
that  they  have  conferred  blessings  and  other  gifts  upon  mankind. 
Thus,  Arawak  legends  point  to  the  Spirits  of  the  Forest  as  the  intro- 
ducers among  them  of  the  flute  made  from  the  femoral  bone  of  animals, 
and  according  to  Akawai  tales,  of  the  sewehekum,  or  lace-work  of  hard 
nutshells  tied  on  the  legs  to  give  proper  time  to  the  movements  in 
dancing  (Da,  184).    Sometimes  these  Spirits  do  positive  good,  as  in 


BOTH]  THE   SPIRITS   OF   THE   BT7SH  179 

the  Jurupari  festival,  whereby  sicknesses  can  be  dispelled,  and  large 
wounds  healed  (KG,  i,  320). 

108.  SufiBcient  has  already  been  said  to  indicate  that  the  Spirits  of 
the  Forest  may  have  their  good  points  as  weU  as  bad;  thev  may 
indeed  have  in  their  nature  more  of  the  imp  than  the  rogue.  They 
have  not  always  home  bad  reputations,  but  the  very  large  majority 
of  them  certainly  do  so  now.  The  Caribs,  however,  admit  that 
they  themselves  are  responsible  for  this,  and  concurrently  for  the 
introduction  of  pain,  misery,  and  death. 

How  Paix,  Misery,  and  Death  Came  into  the  World  (C)  ■ 

In  the  olden  tunes,  there  was  no  contention,  all  were  happy,  and  no  one  became 
sick  or  died.  It  was  then  that  the  Yurokons  used  to  come  and  live  among  us  as 
our  friends  and  associates;  they  were  short  people  like  ourselves.  One  Yurokon  in 
particular  used  to  come  and  drink  paixmrri  with  my  people,  whom  he  would  vifiit 
for  the  purpose  regularly  once  a  month.  The  last  time  he  came,  he  appeared  as  a 
woman  with  a  baby  at  the  breast.  The  Caribs  gave  her  of  the  pepper-pot,  into  which 
she  dipped  the  cassava,  which  she  then  sucked  and  ate.  The  pepper-pot  was  so  hot, 
however,  that  it  burned  the  inside  of  her  mouth  and  "heart."  and  this  made  her 
ask  for  water,  but  her  hostess  told  her  that  she  had  none.  Yurokon  therefore  asked 
for  a  calabash,  and  leaving  her  baby  up  at  the  house,  she  went  down  to  the  waterside, 
where  she  quenched  her  thirst.  On  her  return,  she  looked  for  her  little  child, 
but  it  was  nowhere  to  be  seen:  she  searched  high  and  low,  but  all  in  ^-ain,  because 
during  her  absence  some  worthless  woman  iunong  the  company  had  thrown  it  into 
the  boiling  cassiri  pot.  By  and  by  Yurokon  went  to  stir  the  cassiri  with  the  usual 
paddle-spoon,  and,  while  she  stirred,  the  body  of  her  baby  rose  to  the  surface.  She 
wept,  and  then,  turning  on  the  people,  upbraided  them:  "Why  have  you  punished 
me  in  this  way?  I  have  never  had  a  bad  mind  against  any  of  you,  but  now  I  will 
make  you  pay  me.  In  future  your  children  shall  all  die,  and  this  will  make  you 
weep  as  I  am  weeping.  And  when  children  are  bom  to  you,  you  shall  suffer  pain 
and  trouble  at  their  birth.  Furtliermore,  with  regard  to  you  men,"  continued 
Yurokon,  as  she  addressed  the  male  members  of  the  company.  ''I  will  give  you  great 
trouble  when  you  go  out  to  catch  fish."  And  so  she  did,  because  in  those  days  we 
Caribs  only  had  to  go  to  the  waterside,  bail  the  water  out  with  our  calabashes,  and 
picking  up  the  fish  that  were  left  exposed  at  the  bottom  of  the  stream,  just  put  the 
water  back  again  to  breed  fish  once  more.  Yurokon  altered  all  this,  and  made  us 
go  to  the  trouble,  annoyance,  and  inconvenience  of  poisoning  the  pools  with  various 
roots.  AMiat  is  more,  Yurokon  killed  the  worthless  Indian  who  had  thrown  her  boy 
into  the  cassiri,  and  then  asked  her  children  what  had  become  of  their  mother. 
"She  has  gone  to  the  field."  they  said.  "No,  she  has  not;  she  is  hunting  after 
genitalia  unius  person»  tribus  mea."  was  the  insulting  rejoinder,  a  reply  which- she 
purposely  gave  in  order  to  provoke  them  into  a  rage.  She  asked  them  the  same  ques- 
tion a  second  time,  and  they  told  her  she  had  gone  to  bake  cassava.  '  ■  Xo.  she  has  not, " 
replied  Yurokon;  "she  haS  bored  her  way  into  my  ear,"  an  answer  supposed  to  be 
even  more  offensive.  And  she  asked  them  the  same  question  a  third  time,  but  on 
this  occasion  they  told  her  that  she  had  gone  to  dig  sweet  potatoes.  As  soon  as  they 
mentioned  the  word  "potatoes,"  Yurokon  disappeared.^ 

109.  The  general  tendency  of  these  Spirits,  however,  is  to  do  bad, 
the  degree  of  wickedness  of  which  they  can  be  guilty  varying  with 

1  See  Sect-  ISO. 

'According  to  Carib  tradition  their  Spirits  of  the  Bush  have  a  marked  areision  to  street  potatoes. 


180 


ANIMISM  AND  FOLK-LORE  OF  GUIANA  INDIANS   [bth.  ann.  30 


circumstances  and  locality.  Such  a  Spirit  for  instance  may  "be 
believed  in  simply  as  a  mischievous  imp,  who  is  at  the  bottom  of 
all  those  mishaps  of  their  daily  life,  the  causes  of  which  are  not 
very  immediate  or  obvious  to  their  duU  understandings"  (HWB, 
381).  When  in  the  manufacture  of  their  native  drinks  anything 
goes  wrong  with  the  fermentation,  the  Indians  ascribe  it  to  Spirit 
machinations.  The  following  Warrau  story  is  illustrative  of  this 
belief. 

Why  the  Drink  Txirned  Sour 

A  man  went  one  day  to  visit  some  neighbors,  but,  when  he  arrived  there,  found 
they  were  all  out:  as  it  was  already  too  late  in  the  afternoon  to  allow  of  his  getting 
home  again  before  nightfall,  he  made  arrangements  to  sleep  there  and  return  the 
following  morning.  He  drew  himself  up  on  the  manicole  rafters  and  turned  in. 
But  before  I  go  any  further  I  must  tell  you  that  in  this  house  there  was  a  big  jar,  in 
which  drink  was  being  prepared  in  anticipation  of  next  day's  festivities  when  the 

house-master,  his  family,  and  relatives 
would  have  returned.  Our  friend  had 
not  been  long  on  the  manicole  flooring 
before  he  saw  a  lot  of  Hebus  enter  the 
place,  and  have  a  look  round.  He  heard 
them  say,  "Hullo!  here  is  some  drink. 
Let  us  bathe  first,  and  then  come  and 
taste  it.  It  were  a  pity  to  let  it  spoil." 
So  they  all  went  and  washed  their  skins, 
and  then  returned  for  a  good  carousal. 
But  when  they  started  drinking,  they 
felt  the  want  of  some  music,  and  so  they 
arranged  with  a  labba  to  play  for  them. 
All  the  tune  it  could  play  was  its  usual 
grunt,  but  they  were  quite  satisfied  with 
it,  and  really  enjoyed  their  dance.  Our 
friend  watched  them  until  daybreak, 
when  they  took  their  departure,  the 
little  labba  sneaking  away  behind  a 
plantain  tree.  Later  on,  the  household 
returned,  and  said,  just  as  the  Spirits  did:  "Let  us  bathe  first  and  tlien  drink.  It 
were  a  pity  to  let  it  spoil."  But  the  watcher  warned  them  not  to  touch  the  liquor 
because  he  had  kept  awake  during  the  night,  and  had  seen  the  Hebus  sipping  it. 
They  therefore  threw  all  the  drink  away.  Now,  among  the  household  was  a  widow, 
who  exclaimed:  "Yes.  I  knew  that  the  Hebus  were  going  to  spoil  our  drink." 
And  when  asked  how  she  knew,  she  told  them  that  she  had  received  a  sign,  or 
token,  because  when  she  was  weeping  for  her  late  husband,  he  suddenly  appeared 
before  her  and  told  her  to  cease  to  cry. 

If  an  Indian  loses  his  way  in  the  forest,  the  Spirit  is  the  cause. 
The  Caribs,  however,  know  how  to  circumvent  the  latter,  by  making 
a  string  puzzle,  which  is  left  on  the  pathway:  the  object  of  this 
puzzle  consists  in  removing,  without  cutting  or  breaking,  an  endless 
string  from  off  two  sticks  upon  which  it  has  been  placed  (see  fig.  1). 
The  Spirit  coming  along  sees  the  puzzle,  starts  examining  it,  and 
tries  to  get  the  string  off:  indeed,  so  engrossed  with  it  does  he  become, 
that  he  forgets  all  about  the  wanderer,  who  is  now  free  to  find  the 


Fig, 


1. — Carib  string  puzzle,  designed  to  deceive  the 
Bush  Spirits. 


»0™1  THE   SPIRITS   OF   THE   BUSH  181 

road  again.  In  this  connection,  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  Bates 
speaks  of  his  Indian  boy,  on  the  lower  Amazon,  making  a  charm 
to  protect  them  from  the  Curupari:  "For  this  purpose  he  took  a 
young  pahn-leaf,  plaited  it,  and  fprmed  it  into  a  ring  which  he  hung 
to  a  branch  on  our  track"  (HWB,  35).' 

110.  On  the  Orinoco,  the  Mapoyes  blamed  the  Spirits  of  the  Forest 
for  damage  to  their  fields,  the  Guayquiries  held  them  responsible 
for  aU  their  strifes  and  disputes,  the  Guamos  ascribed  sickness  to  their 
occult  powers,  while  the  Betoyes  regarded  them  as  the  cause  of  the 
deaths  of  all  their  children  whose  necks  they  broke  so  silently  as  not 
to  be  felt  (G,  ii,  23-26).  This  belief  in  their  being  the  cause  of 
sickness  and  death  is  universal  throughout  the  Guianas.  Among 
the  Arawaks  it  is  the  Yawahu-shimara,  or  Spirit's  Arrow,  which  has 
the  property  of  inflicting  pams  or  ills,  the  visible  causes  of  which  are 
not  discoverable.  The  Arawaks,  however,  are  not  alone  in  this  con- 
ception: it  is  apparently  shared  by  the  Caribs,  from  whom  I  learned 
the  following : 

Why  Children  Become  Sick  and  Ckt  (C) 

An  Indian  went  into  the  forest  to  hunt  small  deer,  and  for  this  purpose  built  a 
scaffold  upon  the  trunk  of  a  locust  tree  {Hymensea).  When  completed  he  sat  on  top  of 
it,  bow  and  arrow  in  hand,  waiting  for  the  animals  to  come  and  eat  the  seeds  that  had 
fallen  around.  By  and  by,  a  Yurokon  woman  came  along  with  a  baby  slung  over  her 
breasts,  and  a  quake  over  her  forehead.  She  also  was  fond  of  locust  seed,  and  when 
she  saw  the  fine  fruit  all  scattered  about,  she  put  her  baby  down  on  the  ground  right 
below  the  spot  -where  the  native  was  seated,  and  started  going  round  the  tree,  picking 
up  the  seeds,  and  gathering  them  into  her  basket.  But  while  thus  engaged.nhe  Indian 
shot  the  child,  making  it  cry.  The  mother  rushed  back,  to  find  her  infant  screaming 
for  no  apparent  cause;  she  felt  it  all  over,  but  could  discover  no  arrow .  So  she  took  it 
to  the  piai  of  her  tribe  who  soon  discovered  what  was  the  matter,  and  extracted  the 
weapon,  which  he  showed  her:  he  sucked  it  out  of  the  child.  "Very  well,"  exclaimed 
the  mother;  "Just  as  that  Indian  shot  my  boy,  so  will  my  husband  shoot  his  people's 
children,  and  make  them  cry  without  any  one  knowing  the  reason." 

111.  In  Cayenne,  it  is  Hyorokon,  the  Bush  Spirit,  who  strangles 
some,  corrupts  the  blood  of  others,  covers  this  one  with  ulcers,  and  that 
one  afflicts  with  jaundice.  The  same  Indians  believe  also  in  a  Spirit 
called  Chinay  [thus  far  not  identified  by  me],  who  is  a  real  cannibal  and 
sucks  their  blood,  which  accounts  for  their  being  so  thin  when  sick 
(PBa,  206).  This  belief  (in  the  work  of  the  Spirits)  explains  a 
peculiar  trait  of  Indian  character  which  would  otherwise  be  inex- 
plicable. Believing  that  a  chUd  who  has  just  fallen  into  the  river 
or  has  gotten  beyond  its  depth  is  being  drowned  by  the  will  or  agency 
of  a  Spirit,  the  Indian  who  passes  by  and  sees  the  struggling  child 
is  afraid  to  incur  the  wrath  of  that  Spirit,  by  any  interference  on  his 
part  to  save  the  child.  He  thinks  he  will  have  done  his  utmost  duty 
as  a  neighbor  by  informing  the  parents  of  the  fate  of  their  child 

I  Compare  the  offerings  to  a  medicine-man,  or  to  his  Spirit,  ia  Sect.  t86. 


182  ANIMISM   AND   FOLK-LOEE   OF   GUIANA   INDIANS   [hth.  ann.  30 

(Da,  290).  So  again,  because  sickness  is  regarded  chiefly  as  due  to 
Spirits,  the  method  of  cure  is  therefore  mainly  directed  to  driving 
them  out  by  means  of  presents,  through  the  agency  of  the  piai,  etc' 
113.  Death,  sickness,  and  other  calamities  may  be  inflicted  by  the 
Spirits  upon  mankind,  not  only  out  of  pure  malevolence,  but  also  by 
way  of  punishment  for  transgressions  committed  against  the  recog- 
nized rules  of  law  and  order  as  understood  in  Indian  society.  The 
other  calamities  just  referred  to  include,  inter  alia,  transformation 
into  various  beasts  and  birds,  and  spontaneous  disappearance.  The 
following  flve  legends  from  the  Warraus  and  Arawaks  illustrate  these 
points  pretty  clearly. 

The  Woman  Killed  by  hee  Husband's  Spieit  (W) 

A  party  of  Arawaks,  all  of  them  married  men,  once  went  to  Morawinni,  on  the  way 
to  the  Berbice,  where  they  were  murdered.  Their  wives  whom  they  had  left  behind 
here  [ia  the  Pomeroon]  took  other  men,  all  except  one,  who  was  very  sorry  at  losing  her 
husband,  and  would  not  take  another  one.  She  found  consolation  in  her  two  little 
children.  Later  on,  it  happened  that  the  whole  settlement  went  off  to  a  drink-party, 
but  this  same  woman  preferred  to  remain  behind  alone.  When  night  came  on,  she 
heard  the  harri-harri  (flute)  pkying  in  the  river,  and  the  sound  gradually  coming 
nearer  and  nearer. '  Recognizing  it  as  her  husband's,  she  turned  to  her  child  and  said, 
"That  tune  is  like  what  your  father  used  to  play.  Perhaps  he  alone  was  saved  when 
all  the  others  were  killed. ' '  As  a  matter  of  fact,  it  was  indeed  the  man's  Spirit  trying 
to  come  back  home  again.  On  reaching  the  landing,  he  tied  up  his  corial  and  came 
up  to  the  house,  when  she  recognized  him.  After  saying  "How-day?"  he  asked  her 
if  she  were  well,  and  then  inquired  after  the  two  children.  He  next  told  her  to  sUng 
up  his  hammock,  for  he  was  come  back  sick.  When  rested  in  his  hammock,  he 
began  to  relate  all  that  had  happened,  and  how  he  and  his  party  had  all  been  killed. 
By  and  by  he  said,  "Go  and  fetch  a  Ught:  there  must  be  a  lot  of  dog-fleas  about:  they 
are  biting  my  back  terribly. "  But  instead  of  dog-fleas  it  was  worms  that  were  gnawing 
into  him,  and  when  she  brought  the  fire-stick,  his  wife  could  see  them  all  crawling 
in  and  out,  and  said,  "Nq,  No!  There  are  no  dog-fleas  there."  Now,  from  seeing aU 
the  worms  she  knew  that  it  must  be  her  husband's  Spirit,  and  not  his  Body,  that 
had  returned',  and  it  was  a  token  of  something  that  was  to  happen.  Again,  and  still 
a  third  time,  he  asked  her  to  pick  off  the  dog-fleas,  but  she  persisted  in  her  "No,  No! 
There  are  no  dog-fleas  there."  At  the  same  time  she  began  to  consider  how  she  could 
best  save  herself.  She  began  to  spit,  and  continued  spitting  in  the  same  spot  until 
there  was  quite  a  pool  of  spittle,  when  she  quietly  slipped  away  from  the  house  in  the 
direction  of  a  neighboring  settlement.  Now,  when  the  Spirit  again  asked  her  to 
come  pick  off  the  dog-fleas,  it  was  the  Spittle  that  answered  "No,  No!  There  are 
no  dog-fleas  there."  And  so  the  same  question  and  answer  were  repeated.  But  when 
the  Spittle  was  finally  all  dried  up,  it  could  not  spsak  any  more,  and  as  soon  as  no 
reply  came,  the  Spirit  got  out  of  his  hammock  and  followed  his  wife's  tracks.  Now, 
although  the  fire  that  she  was  carrying  had  gone  out,  she  still  went  on  in  the  darkness, 
the  Spirit  holloa-ing  behind.  As  he  was  closing  in  upon  her,  she  remembered  an  old 
armadillo  hole,  in  which  she  hid  herself,  while  the  Spirit,  rushing  along,  jJassed  on. 
He,  however,  soon  saw  that  he  had  been  tricked,  and  returned  to  the  place  where  she 
had  so  suddenly  disappeared.     Here  he  stopped  and  pondered  a  while,  and  she  heard 

1 1  shall  revert  to  thla  subject  when  dealing  with  the  mediolne-man  (Chap.  XVU).— W.  E.  E. 


BOTH]  THE   SPIRITS   OF   THE  BUSH  183 

him  say  to  himself:  "I  am  dead.  But  though  dead,  I  am  looking  for  her,  and  I  shall 
soon  make  her  dead  also, ' '  and  with  this  she  lost  sight  of  him  in  the  darkness.  Emerg- 
ing from  her  hiding  place,  she  reached  the  next  settlement,  and  told  her  friends 
exactly  what  had  happened.  And  what  the  Spirit  had  said  was  quite  true:  she  soon 
became  sick,  and  died. 

USA.  The  Result  of  Stealing  Other  People's  Property  (W) 

Twenty  men  started  out  to  hunt  bush-hog,  taking  with  them  their  hammocks, 
as  they  expected  to  be  out  some  days.  They  soon  picked  up  tracks  and  followed  them 
until  nightfall,  when  they  camped.  Next  morning  they  continued  on  the  tracks 
until  about  mid-day,  when  they  noticed  plenty  of  victuals  all  stacked  ready  for 
consumption:  there  were  drink  and  meat,  plenty  of  everything  that  an  Indian  can 
desire.  They  asked  one  another,  "Are  you  going  to  eat  of  this?"  Some  said,  "Of 
course  I  am.  Why  not?  Isn't  it  all  ready  prepared  for  us?  "  But  others  said:  "No. 
It  is  not  ours.  We  will  not  eat  what  does  not  belong  to  us."  The  wishes  of  the 
majority  prevailed,  however,  and  all  except  two  of  the  party  partook  of  the  fine 
food.  When  all  was  eaten,  they  resumed  the  trail  until  nightfall,  and  they  again 
camped.  The  two,  however,  who  had  declined  to  eat,  erected  their  banab  at  a 
distance  apart  from  the  others.  And  all,  except  these  two,  fell  fast  asleep.  During 
the  night  the  Hebu  came  along  with  a  light  in  his  hand,  and  approached  the  spot 
where  the  eighteen  were  sleeping.  When  he  got  close  to  the  first  man,  he  extin- 
guished the  light,  and,  sucking  the  air  through  his  half -closed  hand,  extracted  his 
victim's  eyes,  just  as  we  suck  the  flesh  out  of  one  end  of  a  crab-claw.  He  did  the 
same  thing  in  turn  to  each  of  the  other  seventeen,  and  then  withdrew.  The  two  who 
were  camped  in  the  banab  apart  from  the  others,  kept  awake,  and  watched  everything 
that  happened.  Next  morning  early,  as  each  of  the  eighteen  woke,  he  exclaimed, 
"Me,  eye  out!  Me,  eye  out!"  The  poor  fellows  who  had  thus  been  blinded  called 
out  to  the  other  two  who  had  not  eaten  of  the  food  in  question,  and  asked  whether 
they  had  also  lost  their  eyes.  The  letter  said  "Yes  "  at  first,  but  being  pressed  again 
and  again  to  tell  the  truth,  were  finally  forced  to  admit  that  nothing  evil  had  hap- 
pened to  them.  Now,  some  of  these  blind  people  felt  their  trouble  very  keenly. 
Some  of  them  had  big  women  at  home,  and  some  had  little  girls  there — -little  girls 
to  whom  they  had  looked  forward  to  making  their  wives  some  day.  Indeed,  those  of 
them  who  possessed  such  little  girls  grieved  sorely,  and  said:  "We  have  Little  girls  at 
home,  and  as  yef  we  have  never  had  anything  to  do  with  them.  Alas!  Alas!  If  we 
had  only  made  women  of  them  before  this  trouble  fell  ou  us."  '  So  as  to  get  home 
again,  the  blind  ones  told  their  uninjured  mates  to  loosen  the  strings  from  all  their 
bows  and  tie  their  ends  together  so  as  to  make  one  long  string  of  them.  The  eighteen 
held  on  to  this  string,  and  the  two  led- the  way,  and  so  they  proceeded  on  their  journey 
homeward.  But  the  two  uninjured  ones  led  the  way,  not  homeward,  as  they  had  been 
told  to  do,  but  toward  a  big  pond  that  contained  a  large  number  of  iiiiai{Serrasalmo) 
fish.  Beaching  there,  the  two  made  the  blind  ones  surround  the  sheet  of  water  in 
the  form  of  a  circle,  telling  them  that  they  were  about  to  cross  a  river,  and  that  when 
they  heard  a  splash  they  must  immediately  rush  in  straight  ahead.  The  two  leaders 
then  stepping  behind,  threw  over  the  heads  of  their  bUnd  companions  some  heavy 
pieces  of  timber:  as  soon  as  these  fell  into  the  water,  there  was  of  course  a  splash, 
and  all  the  eighteen  blind  ones  rushed  ahead  only  to  knock  up  against  one  another 
in  the  middle  of  the  pond,  where  the  voracious  fish  mutilated  and  destroyed  them. 
They  were  thus  punished  for  taking  food  which  did  not  belong  to  them. 

'  It  is  not  an  uncommon  thing  to  see  an  Indian  who  has  already  a  wile  and  family  of  young  children 
bringing  up  a  little  girl  who  will  be  hla  second  wife  (Br,  352). 


184  ANIMISM  AND   FOLK-LOKE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS    [eth.  ANN.  30 

113.  The  Man  Changed  into  a  Beast  (W) 

Two  brothers  set  out  in  their  corial  to  shoot  morokot  (Myletes)  fish,  after  telling  their 
old  father  where  they  were  going.  The  younger,  who  was  steering,  started  singing. 
"Don't  do  that,"  said  his  brother;  "it  you  make  that  noise,  we  shall  get  no  fish  and 
father  will  be  disappointed."  But  he  would  not  heed,  and  went  on  making  a 
disturbance,  so  the  elder  one  said:  "This  won't  do.  I  will  leave  you  on  shore." 
The  latter  evidently  had  no  objection,  and  with  an  "All  right;  leave  me  here," 
stayed  on  the  bank  where  his  brother  left  him,  still  continuing  his  singing,  which,  if 
anything,  he  now  raised  to  an  even  higher  pitch.  The  elder  brother  then  recognized 
that  it  was  a  token  of  something  that  was  about  to  happen,  and  paddled  on  by  himself 
to  shoot.  He  shot  one  morokot,  then  a  second,  and  then  a  third,  now  that  there  was 
no  noise  about.  Having  shot  enough,  he  went  to  pick  up  his  brother  at  the  river 
bank  where  he  had  left  him,  but  found  him  singing  even ' '  more  high  "  than  ever  before : 
indeed,  so  deafening  was  the  noise — -such  a  rolling  and  a  roaring — that,  becoming 
frightened,  he  went  home  without  him.  The  father  asked  him  where  his  brother 
was,  and  when  he  was  told  that  he  was  screaming  loud  and  thkt  there  was  something 
wrong  with  him,  he  would  not  believe  it,  but  said  he  would  go  to  see  for  himself. 
So  the  two  returned  to  the  spot  where  the  younger  brother  had  been  left;  the  old  man 
heard  the  awful  noise  in  the  distance  and  followed  the  tracks  from  the  waterside. 
The  tracks  were  very  prominent  and  the  leaves  on  each  side  *ere  much  crushed 
and  damaged,  showing  that  abig  carcass  must  have  passed  that  way.  At  last  the  father 
came  upon  his  son,  and  said,  "Come!  Come!"  but  all  the  reply  he  received  was  a 
terrible  roar,  which  frightened  him  so  much  that  he  turned  back,  his  son  following. 
The  latter  had  now  been  changed  by  the  Hebu  into  an  evil  beast,  which  was  ready  to 
kill  anybody  and  anything.  On  reaching  the  waterside  again,  the  father  told  his 
elder  boy  his  experiences  with  the  younger  one,  that  he  was  on  the  road  behind,  and 
that  they  must  both  be  prepared  to  shoot  as  soon  as  he  put  in  an  appearance.  At 
last  the  latter  came  out  into  the  clearing  and  they  shot  him.  It  was  lucky  they  did 
so,  because  he  was  already  changed  into  a  beast«from  the  neck  downward,  with  two 
big  teeth  on  his  belly  (Sect.  100).  Had  he  kept  quiet  when  his  brother  warned  him, 
all  this  trouble  would  not  have  happened. 

114.  The  Man  who  Dined  after  Dark  (A) 

[Note. — It  would  appear  that  in  the  olden  times,  it  was  strictly  "taboo"  for  anyone 
to  take  a  meal  after  nightfall,  though  the  true  reasons  for  such  a  restriction  are  seem- 
ingly not  now  obtainable.  (Sect.  246.)  The  certain  punishment  for  infringement 
of  this  taboo  was  the  transformation  of  the  offender  into  some  bird  or  beast.  The 
following  legend  bears  on  this  belief.] 

There  were  once  two  fishers.  I  do  not  know  their  names,  but  they  were  friends. 
They  went  out  together  one  day  to  a  neighboring  creek,  and  started  building  a  shed, 
as  they  intended  setting  their  hooks  Ln  the  course  of  the  afternoon,  remaining  there 
all  night,  and  visiting  their  lines  next  daybreak.  The  shed  built,  and  the  hooks 
aU  set,  they  came  back  late  to  the  banab,  and  while  resting  there,  they  happened  to 
notice  near  by  a  kokerite  (Maximiliana)  palm  with  a  splendid  bunch  of  ripe  nuts. 
These  they  cut  down  and  began  eating  after  breaking  them  on  the  stones.  They 
were  delicious,  and  they  continued  eating,  until  one  of  them  noticed  that  the  sun 
w^as  about  sinking  on  the  horizon,  when  he  warned  his  friend  to  stop,  advising  him 
to  follow  his  example  and  turn  into  his  hammock.  But  the  warning  was  unheeded: 
he  said  they  were  so  sweet  that  he  couldn't  stop,  and  he  continued  breaking  and 
chewing  the  nuts  until  long  after  dark.  Then,  all  of  a  sudden,  instead  of  breaking 
the  nuts  with  a  stone,  his  friend  in  the  hammock  heard  him  breaking  them  in  his 
teeth,  and  knowing  well  that  no  Indian  could  do  this,  the  friend  felt  convinced  that 
something  had  happened.  He  lit  his  wax  torch,  and  instead  of  a  man,  he  saw  a 
tiger  crunching  the  seeds.    He  slipped  out  of  his  hammock,  wandered  about  tUl 


BOTH]  THE   SPIRITS   OF   THE   BUSH  185 

dawn,  picked  up  his  hooks  and  hurried  home.  When  his  mate's  mother  asked  him 
why  her  son  had  not  accompanied  him,  he  told  her  that  he  had  persisted  in  eating 
after  dark,  and  that  he  was  now  a  Yawahu  tiger.  But  the  old  woman  would  not  believe 
him;  he  therefore  advised  her  to  come  with  him  so  that  she  could  see  for  herself. 
He  took  her  to  the  banab,  and  told  her  that  her  son  was  in  the  bush;  so  she  went  out 
and  Hallekubaf  (i.  e.,  How  are  you?),  and  a  deep  rough  voice  answered,  "That's  your 
son,"  but  again  she  would  not  believe.  Wanting  to  see  for  herself,  she  went  alone 
into  the  bush  in  the  direction  of  the  sound,  although  she  was  strongly  warned  not 
to  do  so.  She  went  on  and  on,  and  at  last  met  the  tiger,  who  sprang  upon  and  killed 
her.  The  mother  was  punished  because  she  would  not  trust  the  man  when  he  told 
her  that  the  tiger  really  was  her  son. 

115.  How  THE  Haimara  Came  to  Have  Such  Fine  Big  Eyes  (A) 

Returning  on  his  way  home  from  the  bush  one  afternoon,  a  hunter  met  a  Konoko- 
kuyuha  making  a  basket,  but  though  he  did  not  actually  recognize  it  as  the  Spirit 
of  the  Bush,  he  certainly  recognized  the  imcanny  appearance  it  presented  on  account 
of  its  having  the  entire  face,  body,  and  limbs  covered  with  thick  hair.  He  asked 
the  Spirit  what  it  was  doing,  but  the  only  word  it  deigned  to  answer  was  bako,  the 
shortened  form  of  bako-hi.^  At  any  rate,  when  he  reached  home,  he  related  his 
experiences  to  his  family  and  friends,  and  advised  them  strongly  not  to  go  to  sleep 
that  night,  because  It,  whatever  it  was,  might  pay  them  a  surprise  visit  after  night- 
fall; all  he  could  tell  them  was  that  it  was  covered  with  hair,  and  that  it  was  making 
an  eye-socket  basket.  But  they  all  laughed  at  him,  and  turning  into  their  ham- 
mocks as  usual,  told  one  another  stories,  and  soon  fell  off  to  sleep.  The  man  who 
had  warned  them  alone  kept  awake,  and,  recognizing  the  low  whistle  in  the  distance, 
tried  to  arouse  his  friends  by  shaking  their  hammocks;  but  it  was  all  in  vain,  and 
he  had  only  just  time  enough  to  clamber  up  into  the  roof,  when  It,  which  he  now  rec- 
ognized to  be  a  Konoko-kuyuha,  entered  the  house.  Once  in,  the  himter  was  able 
to  watch  its  movements  without  being  himself  seen.  He  saw  the  Spirit  stealthily 
approach  each  hammock  and  remove  both  eyes  of  the  snoring  occupant  without 
waking  him.  These  eyes  it  carefully  placed  in  the  now  completed  basket,  and 
then  it  left  the  house.  Next  morning,  when  all  the  people  awoke,  they  discovered 
that  they  could  "see  nothing,  and  they  wondered  what  had  happened,  but  he  who 
had  previously  warned  them  told  them  everything.  They  said  they  were  not  now  fit 
to  live  on  the  land,  and  that  he  must  take  them  to  some  waterside.  He  thereupon 
tied  them  one  to  the  other,  and  when  they  reached  the  stream  he  tied  the  last  one 
to  a  tree:  they  could  not  lose  their  way  now,  and  they  knew  where  they  were. 
He  accordingly  left  them,  as  he  thought,  in  perfect  safety,  promising  to  visit  them 
shortly.  After  a  time  he  redeemed  his  word,  but  he  found  that  all  of  them  had  in 
the  meanwhile  been  under  water,  and  had  changed  into  fish,  the  one  exception  being 
the  individual  tied  to  the  tree  who,  being  able  to  get  into  the  water  only  up  to  his 
middle,  had  turned  but  halfway  into  a  fish.  So  the  man  went  away,  promising  to 
come  again.  He  was  a  long  time  returning,  so  long,  in  fact,  that  the  Spirit  took  pity 
on  the  last  man,  and  completed  his  transformation,  giving  him  back  his  own  two  eyes, 
which  "are  all  very  fine  and  large,"  so  to  speak,  especially  for  a  haimara  fish  (Hopli- 
03  malabaricus),  which  was  what  the  Spirit  changed  him  into.  And  when  their  old 
friend  did  return  at  last,  he  cut  the  rope  from  the  tree,  thus  allowing  the  haimara  and 
other  fish  to  play  about  with  perfect  freedom  in  the  water,  where  they  have  since 
remained.    They  were  punished  for  their  unbelief. 

116.  Bush  Spirits  are  excellent  hunters,  and  some  of  them  even 
know  how  to  employ  the  rattle,  just  like  a  medicine-man. 

'  This  word  is  the  Arawak  term  tor  an  eye-socket;  it  is  applied  to  a  particalar  variety  of  basket,  char^ 
acteriied  by  having  an  oblong  concavity  in  its  base,  a  peculiarity  which  the  name  suggests. 


186  ANIMISM   AND   FOLK-LOKE   OF   GUIANA   INDIANS   [eth.  ANii  30 

The  Weong  Rattle,  the  Bush-hog,  and  the  Babt  (W) 

\  man  with  his  wife  and  two  sons  went  one  day  to  a  neighboring  settlement  to 
join  a  drink-party.  In  the  house  they  left  their  two  girls,  who  were  busy  making 
cassiri,  and  this  is  what  happened  to  them.  Going  to  fetch  some  more  water  from 
the  creek,  they  heard,  as  they  stroUed  along,  a  peculiar  sort  of  cry.  It  was  really 
Siwara,  the  Hebu  (Bush  Spirit),  intentionally  misleading  them  by  imitating  the  call 
of  the  oto,  a  bird  bigger  than  the  Baridi  hawk.  So  they  challenged  it  in  the  usual 
way  (Sect.  ISO),  shouting,  "Don't  cry,  but  show  yourself,  or  kill  something  for 
us."  They  saw  nothing,  and  they  heard  nothing  further.  However,  after  reach- 
ing home,  and  resting  awhile,  a  young  man  approached  the  house,  and  greeting  them 
with  "Grood-day,  Cousins!"  he  entered.^  "Where  are  your  parents?"  was  the  next 
inquiry  of  the  stranger,  who  of  course  was  no  other  than  Siwara,  he  having  put  in 
an  appearance  in  obedience  to  the  challenge  to  show  himself.  And  the  girls,  telUng 
him  that  they  were  aU  away  at  a  paiwarri,  offered  him  cassava  and  drink.  When  he 
had  partaken  of  this,  Siwara  told  them  to  go  and  fetch  in  the  powis  which  he  had 
brought  for  them:  this  done,  he  asked  them  to  bring  in  his  hammock,  as  he  proposed 
staying  over  night.  They  fetched  the  hammock  and  slung  it  at  that  end  of  the  house 
farthest  removed  from  their  sleeping  quarters.  "Don't  be  afraid!  I  am  not  going 
to  trouble  you."  And  he  spoke  true,  because  the  girls  slept  right  through  the  night 
without  being  troubled  by  him.  Next  morning  early  Siwara  returned  to  the  bush, 
but  before  taking  his  departure  warned  them  not  to  tell  their  parents  that  he  had 
paid  them  a  visit.  Not  long  after,  the  father  and  mother  came  home,  and  seeing  the 
dried  powis,  exclaimed,  "HuUo!  How  did  you  manage  to  get  that?"  The  girls  lied, 
saying,  "We  came  upon  an  oto  hawk  who  had  caught  it,  and  we  took  it  away  from 
him."  By  and  by,  the  powis  was  cooked  and  eaten,  and  as  the  old  father  was  chew- 
ing the  portion  he  had  just  picked  out  of  the  pot,  he  came  across  a  piece  of  arrow  in 
it,  a  kokerite  one.^  Turning  to  his  daughters,  he  inquired  of  them:  "  If  an  oto  killed 
the  bird,  how  did  this  kokerite  arrow  get  in?"  and  they  had  to  admit  that  the 
powis  had  been  brought  to  them  by  their  ' '  uncle . "  '  "  Then  why  did  you  not  tell  me  so 
at  first?"  he  rejoined.  "Why  did  you  not  let  me  know  that  he  had  visited  you  while 
your  mother  and  I  were  away?  Go  straight  away  now,  and  call  him  in!"  So  they 
went  outside  and  shouted,  Dahu!  Dakul  and  who  should  immediately  answer  the 
summons  but  Siwara  himself.  As  he  entered,  the  house-master  welcomed  him,  and 
he  sat  himself  down  on  the  chair-bench  that  was  offered  him.  "Thanks!  Thanks!" 
he  exclaimed;  "I  was  here  yesterday,  and  kept  the  girls  company."  Now  the  old 
father,  who  had  been  to  the  drinking  party,  was  still  fairly  bemuddled  and  hardly 
knew  what  he  was  doing;  at  the  same  time,  although  hejiad  not  the  slightest  idea 
who  Siwara  was,  he  certainly  offered  his  elder  daughter  to  him,  provided  he  liked 
her.  It  so  happened  that  Siwara  liked  her  very  much,  and  he  therefore  turned  to 
her  mother  and  asked  her  whether  she  would  care  1x)  have  Vh'tti  for  son-in-law.  She 
said,  "Yes,  very  much."  And  thus  it  came  to  pass  that  the  Hebu  obtained  his 
wife,  and  arranged  to  take  up  his  abode  with  her  at  her  father's  place.  Siwara,  how- 
ever, proved  himself  a  very  good  husband  and  son-in-law,  and  always  returned  from 
his  hunting  expeditions  well  loaded  with  game.  He  also  took  the  trouble  to  teach 
his  wife's  brothers  how  to  shoot  bush-hog.  Formerly,  whenever  these  two  fellows 
went  out  and  brought  back  a  bird,  they  would  say  they  had  brought  back  bush-hog. 
You  see,  they  did  not  know  what  a  bush-hog  really  was.     So  he  took  them  out  one 

1  Ija-^anuka  is  Warrau  for '  cousin,^  the  word  used  by  the  narrator.  An  Indian  will  greet  any  other  female 
of  his  tribe  in  three  ways:  If  older,  as  'mother'  or  'auntie';  if  about  the  same  age,  as  'sister'  or  'cousin'; 
and  if  much  younger,  as  'child/  'daughter,'  etc. 

'  Kokerite  is  used  only  for  the  blow-pipe,  that  is,  poisoned  arrows. 

'  The  Warrau  word  for  'uncle'  as  used  here  is  daku:  not  only  does  this  mean  the  parents'  brother  but 
practically  every  male  of  about  corresponding  age. 


BOTH]  THE   SPIRITS   OF  THE  BUSH  187 

day,  and  when  they  reached  a  suitable  spot,  he  shook  his  maraka  (rattle)  and  bush-hogs 
came  ruehing  up  in  obedience  to  the  summons.  "This  is  hog;  shoot,"  said  Siwara, 
but  the  two  brothers,  who  had  never  seen  one  before,  were  frightened  and  climbed 
up  a  tree,  so  he  had  to  kill  three  or  four  by  himself,  and  these  they  subsequently 
took  home.  Time  passed,  and,  his  wife  having  presented  him  with  a  baby,  Siwara 
became  a  recognized  heir  of  her  family's  possessionB,  and  removed  his  own  property, 
which  he  had  hitherto  kept  in  the  bush,  into  his  father-in-law's  house,  which  hence- 
forth became  his  own  hearth  and  home.'  Among  the  property  which  he  brought  with 
him  to  his  new  home  were  four  rattles  used  for  bush-hog  only.  There  are  two  kinds 
of  hog,  the  timid  {eburi)  and  the  very  savage  (eburi-oriasgi),  and  there  were  a  pair 
of  marakaa  for  each  kind:  one  rattle  to  call  the  beast,  the  other  to  drive  it  away 
(Sect.  298).  So  after  he  had  hung  them  up  Siwara  warned  his  wife's  people  that 
on  no  account  must  they  touch  these  marakas  during  his  absence,  because  trouble 
would  be  certain  to  ensue.  Siwara  soon  afterward  went  away  to  cut  a  field;  during 
his  absence  one  of  the  brothers-in-law  came  home,  and,  seeing  the  prettily  feathered 
rattles  all  in  a  row,  could  not  resist  the  temptation  of  taking  one  down  and  scrutinizing 
it  closely.  While  absorbed  in  its  contemplation,  he  forgot  aU  about  the  injunction, 
and  started  shaking  it.  Good  Lord!  It  was  the  wrong  rattle — the  one  for  the  wild 
bush-hog!  And  now  these  savage  beasts  came  trooping  in  from  near  and  far,  leaving 
the  poor  mother,  her  two  brothers,  and  the  old  people  barely  time  to  escape  with 
their  lives  up  the  nearest  trees.  In  the  hurry  and  excitement,  however,  the  mother 
had  forgotten  her  baby,  which  the  hogs  tore  in  pieces  and  devoured.  On  seeing  all 
this,  happening  below,  the  fugitives  yelled  and  screamed  for  Siwara  to  come  quickly 
and  get  rid  of  all  these  beasts,  so  that  they  might  descend  in  safety.  Siwara  came  and, 
shaking  the  proper  rattle,  drove  the  brutes  away.  When  they  had  all  dispersed, 
and  his  relatives  had  joined  him,  he  looked  for  his  baby,  but  of  course  did  not 
find  it.  He  blamed  them  for  disobeying  his  orders,  and  was  so  angered  that  he  left 
them.     It  is  very  hard  for  them  to  get  food  now. 

ll?.  The  Spirits  of  the  Forest  are  blessed,  or  cursed,  with  strong 
patriarchal  tendencies,  are  very  fond  of  women,  and  of  human  flesh 
generally.  They  have  an  unconquerable  attraction  toward  suckling 
babes  and  pregnant  women  (Da,  183),  a  statement  which  appears 
to  be  confirmed  in  the  accompanying  legends.  I  do  not  know  the 
reason  of  their  supposed  relationship  to  children,  but  certain  it  is 
that  among  the  Pomeroon  Arawaks,  it  was  the  Yawahus  who  were 
asked  by  the  piais  to  bring  babies  to  those  women  who  wanted  them 
(Sect.  S02).  On  the  upper  Orinoco  it  was  the  Bush  Spirit  lolok- 
iamo  who,  together  with  the  tikitiki  bird,  was  considered  responsible 
for  the  deformities  of  new-born  children  (AVH,  n,  249). 

1  Among  all  tljese  Indians,  the  husband  becomes  a  member  of  his  wife's  family.  His  permanent 
retention  of  his  wife  depends  on  the  satisfactory  completion  by  him  of  various  tasks,  as  the  cutting  of  a 
field  and  the  building  of  a  house.  The  recognition  of  him  and  his  acceptance  of  the  responsibilities  of  the 
position  as  the  lawful  heir  of  his  wife's  family  whose  interests  he  has  henceforth  to  protect  and  safeguard, 
commence  with  the  appearance  of  the  baby.  So-called  "  marriage  "  to  the  Indian  is  a  question  of  neither 
morality  nor  ethics,  but  one  of  policy.  He  takes  up  with  a  woman  so  that  she  may  bear  him  children, 
especially  daughters,  whose  husbands  will  have  to  provide  for  his  old  age,  as  by  custom  from  time  imme- 
morial ordained.  If  she  proves  barren,  he  but  naturally  takes  unto  himself  another.  Without  the  advent 
of  offspring,  no  woman  is  wanted.  Hence,  in  those  districts  where  missionaries  have  established 
themselves,  the  celebration  of  the  marriage  contract  very  generally  takes  place  only  after  the  bride^lect 
has  proved  herself  an  ideal  woman  by  becoming  pregnant.  Sterility  is  regarded  as  a  shame  and  disgrace 
by  both  sexes.  Any  physically  developed  woman,  married  or  single,  so  afflicted,  Is  described  as  a  "  mule  " 
by  English-speaking  Indians;  the  Arawaks  speak  of  such  a  female  as  massormto  (barren)  m  the  sense  of 
degradation  and  reproach. 


188  ANIMISM   AND   FOLK-LOKE   OF   GUIANA   INDIANS    [bth.  ANN.  30 

The  Killing  of  the  Bush  Spirit  and  his  Wife  (A) 

This  is  another  story  about  a  man  who  went  out  hunting  one  day  and  took  his  wife 
with  him.  But  when  he  left  her  as  usual  one  morning  at  the  banab,  he  did  not  know 
anything  about  a  Bush  Spirit  in  the  neighborhood  and  hence  could  give  her  no  warning 
as  to  how  she  should  behave  herself.  At  any  rate,  it  was  not  long  after  her  husband 
had  taken  his  departure  that  a  Kokono-kuyuha  came  to  the  house  and  asked  her 
how  she  fared  and  where  her  man  had  gone.  She  told  him  that  he  had  gone  out 
hunting  and  that  she  did  not  expect  him  until  late  in  the  afternoon.  The  Spirit 
went  away  but  not  before  mentioning  that  she  might  see  him  again  in  the  course  of 
the  evening:  you  see,  he  was  greedy  and  thought  it  would  be  less  trouble  to  kill  and 
eat  them  both  at  one  and  the  same  time.  Now,  when  the  husband  did  return,  she  told 
him  that  a  Something  had  been  to  see  her,  and  that  It  intended  coming  again  that 
very  night.  "You  are  not  speaking  the  truth,"  was- all  the  thanks  she  got  for  the 
warning  which  she  gave  him,  and  after  eating  his  meal,  he  turned  into  his  hammock 
where  he  soon  fell  asleep  and  snored  heavily.  By  and  by  the  Konoko-kuynha  came 
along,  giving  warning  of  his  approach  in  the  usual  way  we  Indians  always  signal 
when  we  approach  a  dwelling,  that  is,  by  striking  a  few  times  on  the  buttresses  of  the 
trees.  The  wife  heard  the  noise,  and  recognizing  what  it  was,  tried  to  wake  her  hus- 
band, but  was  unsuccessful:  he  slept  too  soundly.  She  quickly  hid  herself.  Once 
in  the  banab,  the  Bush  Spirit  approached  the  sleeping  man's  hammock,  and  tried 
to  wake  him:  failing  in  this,  he  broke  his  neck,  drank  his  blood,  and  left  him 
dead.  The  Spirit  then  wandered  all  over  the  place  looking  for  the  wife,  but  could 
not  find  her.  She,  however,  could  hear  him  saying,  "If  I  had  known  that  she  intended 
giving  me  the  slip,  I  would  have  finished  her  oS  this  morning."  She  saw  him  leave 
the  banab  and  go  back  into  the  bush,  but  she  remained  in  her  hiding-place  until  the 
dawn,  when,  after  burying  the  body,  she  ran  back  home  and  told  her  brother  all  that 
had  taken  place,  and  that  she  was  now  a  widow.  The  brother  was  exceedingly  angry, 
and  determined  upon  killing  the  Spirit.  Next  day,  he  went  with  his  sister  to  the  same 
banab  where  the  late  tragedy  had  taken  place,  and  the  following  morning  left  her 
by  herself  there,  just  as  his  poor  brother-in-law  had  done,  but  instructed  her  to  fool 
the  Konoko-kuyuha,  should  he  come,  by  telling  him  that  her  husband  was  still  alive 
and  that  he  would  be  glad  to  see  him  in  the  evening.  The  Spirit  did  appear  again, 
and  was  certainly  surprised  to  see  her  there:  he  asked  her  as  before,  how  she  fared, 
and  where  her  man  had  gone.  She  told  him  that  he  had  gone  out  hunting,  that 
she  did  not  expect  him  until  late  in  the  afternoon,  and,  if  he  liked  to  pay  them  a  visit 
in  the  evening,  that  her  husband  would  be  very  pleased  indeed  to  see  him.  The  Spirit 
was  only  too  glad  to  have  the  opportunity,  and  promised  to  come:  in  his  mind,  he 
said  that  if  he  broke  the  man's  neck-bone  this  time,  he  would  make  sure  of  killing 
him,  and  then  deal  with  the  wife.  As  had  been  previously  arranged,  the  brother"* 
returned  to  the  banab  soon  after  midday,  and  made  a  special  arrow  while  his  sister 
did  the  cooking.  After  partaking  of  the  food,  he  instructed  her  how  to  tempt  the 
Spirit  into  having  a  dance  with  her,  and  at  the  same  time  showed  her  how  to  hold  his 
hands,  and  not  to  embrace  him  too  closely,  so  that  when  he  let  fly  this  special  arrow 
it  might  not,  by  any  chance,  strike  her.  He  then  went  and  hid  himself.  By  and  by, 
just  as  the  darkness  began  to  fall,  the  Konoko-kuyuha  walked  up,  and  asked  her 
where  her  husband  was.  After  telling  him  that  he  had  not  yet  returned,  she  obtruded 
the  glory  of  alj  her  charms  and  asked  him  to  dance  with  her.  The  Spirit,  yielding 
to  her  temptations,  only  too  readily  agreed.  They  began  to  caper,  and  holding  him 
as  she  had  been  warned,  she  circled  him  round  and  round,  closer  and  closer  to  where 
her  brother  lay  ambushed.  It  was  not  long  before  the  latter  was  able  to  take  good  aim, 
and,  letting  fly  the  special  arrow,  sent  it  right  through  the  wicked  Spirit  who  fell 
mortally  wounded.  Before  dying,  however,  Konoko-kuyuha  looked  reproachfully 
at  the  woman  and  said,  "I  did  nothing  to  you,  to  make  you  wish  to  kill  me,"  but 


BOTH]  THE   SPIRITS   OF   THE   BUSH  189 

when  her  reply  came,  "No,  indeed,  but  you  wanted  to,"  he  closed  his  eyes.  How 
glad  the  brother  and  sister  were!  and  the  brother  said,  "We  had  better  tarry  awhile, 
because  Konoko-kuyuha's  wife  will  come  and  look  for  him."  Sure  enough,  they 
soon  heard  the  moaning  of  the  Spirit's  wife  as  she  came  along  crying,  and  saying,  "I 
must  get  payment  for  my  husband"  (i.  e.,  her  husband's  death  must  be  avenged). 
So  they  both  hid  themselves,  and  as  the  Spirit  woman  passed  along,  the  brother  shot 
her  also,  and  cut  up  the  bodies.  When  they  both  got  home,  they  told  their  friends 
and  relatives  about  all  that  had  happened,  and  everybody  was  delighted. 

ll'JA.  The  Woman  Kills  the  Hebu  (W) 

When  going  to  a  party  it  is  customary  among  us  Indians  for  the  man  to  start  early 
in  the  morning,  leaving  his  wife  to  follow  in  the  course  of  the  afternoon.  WeU  now, 
on  one  such  occasion,  after  the  house-master  had  left  for  the  drink-feast,  another  man 
came  and  paid  the  spouse  a  visit,  telling  her  that  she  must  come  with  bim  to  his  place. 
She  said:  "No!  You  are  not  my  husband,  so  I  cannot  do  that."  But  when  he 
threatened  to  kill  her  if  she  refused,  she  agreed  to  accompany  him,  although  her  little 
child  told  her  not  to  go.  This  man  was  really  a  Hebu,  and  when  he  arrived  with  her 
and  the  child  at  his  house,  he  told  her  she  could  have  whatever  she  wanted,  pointing 
at  the  same  time  to  all  the  dried  meat — game,  fish,  bird,  and  human  flesh — that  was 
hanging  around.  Picking  what  she  required,  she  placed  it  in  the  pot  and  this  she 
put  on  the  fire.  All  the  time  she  was  thinking  how  she  could  fool  the  Hebu,  so  that 
when  he  called  her  to  come  into  his  hammock,  her  plans  were  quite  prepared.  She 
joined  him  in  his  hammock,  but  refused  to  lie  down  in  it,  and  when  he  told  her  to 
kiss  and  coddle  him,  she  said  she  couldn  't  do  so  because  he  was  covered  over  so  much 
with  hair.  He  told  her  where  to  find  a  bamboo-knife,  and  she  conmienced  shaving  his 
face;  while  holding  up  his  chin,  she  stuck  the  knife  into  his  throat  and  killed  him. 
Rushing  off  now  with  her  child,  the  woman  joined  her  husband  at  the  drink-party, 
telling  him  exactly  what  had  happened:  how  the  Hebu  had  made  her  come  to  his 
house,  wh^re  she  had  killed  him.  And  when  the  sport  was  finished  next  morning 
she  took  her  husband  to  the  scene  of  the  tragedy.  As  soon  as  he  saw  the  dead  Hebu's 
body  lying  in  the  hammock,  he  was  satisfied  that  she  had  told  him  the  truth. 

118.  The  Bush  Spirit  and  the  Pregnant  Woman  (A) 

There  was  a  man  with  his  wife  living  in  a  house.  One  afternoon,  the  husband  went 
to  watch  for  an  acouri.  By  and  by  she  heard  a  whistling  sound,  and  a  man  came  and 
paid  her  a  visit:  'tis  true  he  was  like  a  man,  but  yet  different,  because  there  was  hair 
growing  all  over  him.  He  was  really  a  Konoko-kujiiha,  but  she  did  not  know  this 
at  the  time.  "Where  has  your  husband  gone?"  he  inquired;  and  when  she  told 
him  he  was  out  hunting  the  acouri,  the  stranger  asked  her  whether  he  was  very  far 
away,  and  she  replied,  "  Not  very  far. "  To  make  sure  that  the  husband  might  not 
suddenly  return  and  frustrate  his  wicked  designs,  the  Spirit  made  the  wife  shout  out 
three  times,  and  as  no  answer  came,  he  knew  he  would  be  safe.  He  told  her  to  dance 
for  him,  and  then  came  very  close  to  her.  This  she  thought  somewhat  strange,  because 
she  was  heavily  eneiente,  but  she  did  what  she  was  told.  At  last  he  took  his  departure, 
and  as  he  went  along  he  knocked  the  tree-buttresses  with  a  stick,  to  make  the  woman 
think  that  it  was  her  husband  coming.  So  the  wife  was  content  in  her  mind.  How- 
ever, it  was  a  long  wait  for  her  until  her  husband  did  finally  come;  he  had  wandered 
far,  and  found  no  acouri.  Like  a  good  wife,  she  made  a  clean  breast  of  all  that  hap- 
pened in  his  absence,  describing  minutely  how  she-had  been  \'isited  by  one  who  was 
like  a  man,  but  yet  different,  because  there  was  hair  growing  all  over  him,  and  that 
he  had  been  close  to  her.  The  husband  laughed,  andsaid:  "  Nonsense,  wife!  It  must 
have  been  some  old  sweetheart  of  yours. "    She  replied,  "  Nothing  of  the  sort;  "  but 


190  ANIMISM  AND   FOLK-LORE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS    [eth.ann.  30 

he  reiterated,  "  Yes,  it  must  have  been  so. ' '  It  being  now  already  late  in  the  evening, 
they  turned  into  their  respective  hammocks,  and  the  husband  soon  fell  into  a  deep 
slumber.  His  spouse,  however,  could  not  sleep;  she  heard  the  Spirit's  warning 
approach — a  low  whistling  noise — and  got  up  to  wake  her  man,  but,  tug  and  push  as 
much  as  she  would,  she  could  not  rouse  him — ^he  slept  too  soundly.  She  drew  to  one 
side  just  in  time  to  see  the  Spirit  enter.  She  saw  him  kill  her  husband  and  then  eat 
him,  and  when  he  had  finished,  she  heard  him  say:  "  That  was  good.  But  the  sweetest 
morsel  has  gone — the  woman  with  a  baby."  She  ran  away  as  quickly  and  as  far  as 
her  legs  would  carry  her. 

119.  The  Contented  and  Happy  Son-in-law  (W) 

Once  upon  a  time  there  was  a  good  old  man  who,  possessed  of  a  young  wife  and  a 
field  well  planted,  lived  happily  and  contented.  When  oft  to  his  field  one  morning, 
he  met  a  young  man  coming  in  the  direction  of  his  house,  and  noticed  that,  during  the 
greeting  which  they  gave  each  other,  the  stranger  kept  his  eyes  fixed  hard  on  his 
wife  in  the  dim  distance.  On  his  return  home  in  the  afternoon,  he  met  the  stranger 
again  in  just  about  the  same  place,  where  his  movements  seemed  very  suspicious:  he 
rightly  concluded  that  he  was  dealing  with  a  Hebu  and  went  on  home.  Arrived  there, 
he  told  his  wife  he  was  going  to  hunt  a  little,  and  took  his  bow  and  arrow  with  him; 
but  what  he  really  did  was  to  hide  in  the  immediate  vicinity.  And  from  his  hiding 
place  he  saw  the  Hebu  steal  into  the  house  and  wrestle  with  his  wife,  who  was  just 
about  grating  the  cassava:  he  heard  her  say  "  No!  No!  Oh,  if  only  my  man  were  not 
so  far  away!"  So  taking  aim,  and  waiting  for  a  chance  not  to  hurt  his  wife,  he  let  fly 
and  shot  the  Spirit,  Both  Spirit  and  wife  simultaneously  disappeared.'  It  would  seem 
that  the  Hebu  had  dragged  his  victim  to  the  water's  edge  and  thence  thrown  her  in; 
fortunately  she  had  caught  hold  of  the  bushes  alongside  the  river  bank,  and  came  up 
to  the  surface.  On  meeting  her  husband,  she  told  him  she  thought  she  had  been  dead 
and  never  expected  to  see  him  more;  she  told  him  also  how  the  Hebu  had  threatened 
to  visit  their  place  again.  They  therefore  went  over  to  her  mother's  home,  and  stayed 
there  a  long  while.  At  last  the  old  man  thought  it  was  time  to  look  over  his  cassava 
and  plantains,  and  with  his  wife  and  brother-in-law  returned  to  the  scene  of  the 
outrage.  The  brother,  who  was  a  powerful  medicine-man,  led  the  way.  As  he  went 
along  he  was  accosted  by  a  beautiful  girl,  who,  staring  into  his  eyes,  rushed  up  ready 
to  put  her  arms  around  his  neck,  and  then  drew  back.  Now,  except  at  a  drinkingfeast 
and  when  she  is  drunk,  no  Indian  woman  would  behave  in  this  bold  maimer,  and  it 
was  thus  that  they  recognized  her  to  be  the  Hebu.  The  medicine-man  just  looked 
at  her  in  silence,  and  she  fell  dead.  The  wife  also  met  her  death  shortly  after,  and 
they  then  remembered  having  noticed  the  token;  she  had  omitted  to  bathe  after  a 
meal  some  days  before.  But  the  parents  of  the  deceased  girl  were  very  fond  of  their 
good  old  son-in-lav,  and  gave  him  the  younger  of  their  two  remaining  daughters  as  a 
helpmate.^  But  the  elder  one  becoming  jealous,  went  over  to  the  husband's  place 
and  picked' a  quarrel  with  her  younger  sister;  this  made  the  latter  go  and  tell  the 
old  man  that  she  was  afraid  to  remain  with  him  any  longer.  But  he  said:  "  No!  I 
don't  want  your  sister.  She  is  much  too  passionate  for  an  old  man  like  me,  whereas 
you  and  I  get  along  very  well  together."  The  parents  then  gave  a  drinking  party, 
at  which  the  old  man  got  so  drunk  that  he  fell  into  his  hammock;  whereupon  the  elder 
sister  got  in  also.  He  was  not  so  drunk,  however,  as  not  to  be  able  to  turn  her  out, 
which  he  did.     She  then  said  that  they  would  have  to  kill  her  before  she  would  let 


1  When  a  person  suddenly  disappears  from  any  place  without  leaving  a  trace,  under  circumstances  which 
in  plain  English  would  be  described  as  murder  and  disposal  of  the  body,  the  Indians  ascribe  it  to  the  Evil 
Spirit. 

2  Among  many  savage  races,  the  husband  has  marital  rights  over  his  wile's  sisters,  and  vice  versa; 
I  have  found  several  traces  of  this  communal  form  of  marriage  in  the  Guianas.— W.  E.  E, 


BOTH]  THE   SPIRITS   OF   THE   BUSH  191 

hiTTi  alone.  And  so  the  brother  killed  her.  On  seeing  all  the  trouble  that  had 
arisen,  and  recognizing  how  he  had  been  the  cause  of  it,  the  old  man  offered  to  go 
away,  but  the  brother  said  he  would  Trill  him  before  he  would  let  him  go.  And  so 
the  old  man  stayed  with  his  wife's  parents  in  the  customary  way,  and  continued  to 
live  long,  happy,  and  contented. 

120.  The  Bush  Spirit  Tricked  While  Hunting  Frogs  (A) 

A  family  received  an  invitation  to  go  to  a  drink-party,  and  they  all  accepted  except 
the  daughter,  who,  in  spite  of  her  parents'  wishes,  refused  to  go.  And  so  she  was  left 
at  home,  all  alone.  By  and  by,  late  in  the  afternoon,  there  came  to  see  her  a  young- 
woman  friend  whom  she  had  not  seen  for  a  very  long  time;  at  least  she  thought  it  was 
her  old  friend  Dai-adalla  (lit.,  'My-Knife"),  but  in  reality  her  visitor  was  Yawahu, 
who  had  taken  on  the  real  friend's  shape  and  appearance,  the  better  to  carry  out  his 
evil  designs.^  Being  such  supposedly  good  friends,  the  Yawahu  addressed  the  girl 
as  Dai-adalla,  and  asked  what  she  was  doing  at  home  all  by  herself.'  When  the  girl 
had  told  her  that  she  had  refused  to  go  to  the  drink-party,  the  Yawahu  said:  "Oh, 
very  well.  I  will  stay  to-night  and  keep  you  company,"  and  so  she  did.  In  the 
evening  when  darkness  was  coming  on,  a  lot  of  frogs  were  to  be  heard  croaking,  which 
made  the  girl  ask  her  friend  whether  she  ate  those  creatures,  and  finding  that  she  was 
really  very  fond  of  that  dish,  they  agreed  to  go  straightway  and  catch  some.  They 
went  out  together  into  the  darkness,  each  in  opposite  directions,  and  after  a  time  they 
began  to  call  out,  the  one  asking  the  other  what  she  had  caught.  The  Yawahu 
ahswered,  "Plenty,  but  I  am  eating  them  as  fast  as  I  can  gather  them."  Now,  this 
peculiar  reply — eating  the  creatures  raw — frightened  the  girl,  who  thereupon  recog- 
nized for  the  first  time  the  real  nature  of  her  fictitious  friend.  And  when  the  Yawahu 
called  out,  "  Dai-adalla!  how  many  have  you  got?  "  the  girl  responded ,  ' '  Plenty,  but  I 
am  putting  them  into  my  calabash."  The  latter  was  thinking  hard  all  the  time  how  to 
escape  from  her  companion  to  a  place  of  safety;  she  knew  only  too  well  that,  notwith- 
standing the  darkness ,  the  Yawahu  could  tell  her  whereabouts  by  the  sound  of  her  voice . 
So  when  Yawahu  called  out  to  her  once  more,  the  girl  shouted  back:  "Hush!  Don't 
speak,  or  make  such  noise.  The  frogs  are  getting  frightened,  and  I  shall  not  be  able  to 
catch  any  more!"  'WTien  silence  reigned  again,  the  girl  stealthily  retraced  her  steps 
to  the  house,  crept  gently  in,  and  without  the  slightest  sound  turned  all  the  pots 
upside  down.  This  done,  she  threw  all  the  frogs  away,  and  climbed  up  on  the  roof 
to  await  developments.  These  were  not  long  in  coming,  nor  was  the  Yawahu,  for, 
waiting  a  while,  and  receiving  no  response  to  his  call,  he  recognized  that  he  had  been 
tricked  and  hurried  back  to  the  house.  Here  he  groped  about  in  the  darkness,  and 
turned  up  pot  after  pot,  but  his  prey  was  nowhere  underneath.  "  Ah! "  he  exclaimed, 
loud  enough  for  his  intended  victim  to  hear,  "I  would  have  eaten  her  at  the  same 
time  as  the  frogs  if  I  had  thought  she  was  going  to  get  awtiy  from  me."  And  so  he 
searched  unsuccessfully — ^there  were  many  many  pots — until  dawn,  when  he  had  to 
leave.  The  girl  then  descended  from  the  roof  and  waited  for  her  people  to  retimi, 
and  on  their  arrival  she  told  them  how  the  Yawahu  had  ^^sited  her  in  the  di^:uise 
of  her  friend.  The  father  said,  "Next  time  we  teU  you  to  come  with  us,  you  will 
obey." 

131.  Since  Spirits  are  supposed  to  have  a  peculiar  fondness  for 
tobacco  (Sect.  27),  and  to  be  continually  inhaling  its  fumes,  the 
smoke  of  the  fragrant  weed  is  largely  used  in  their  invocation  (Sect. 

1  The  "knife "  which  gave  rise  to  the  girl's  name  was  probably^Jie  labba-tooth  instrument  employed  by 
the  old-time  Arawaks.  Among  the  other  Indians  there  are  records  of  knives  and  kindred  implements 
being  made  from  the  teeth  of  the  pirai  fish,  from  a  piece  of  bamboo,  etc. 

'  Intimate  friends  call  one  another  by  the  identical  name:  the  same  thing  occnis  among  men  (Sect.  BOS). 


192  ANIMISM   AND   FOLK-LOKE   OF   GUIANA   INDIANS    [bth.  ANN.  30 

808).  Among  the  Caribs,  the  first  two  Spirits  that  are  called  on  by 
the  medicine-man  with  his  rattle  are  Maw^ri  (Sect.  309)  and  Makai- 
abtoi.  The  latter  puts  in  an  appearance  with  the  tobacco  smoke, 
in  which  he  is  enveloped:  otherwise  he  remains  in  the  rattle  (mardka), 
coming  out  only  when  this  is  shaken.  The  former's  weakness  for 
tobacco  constitutes  the  subject  of  the  Carib  legend  here  given. 

123.  Mawari  and  Tobacco  Smoke  (C) 

There  was  once  an  Indian  who  was  extremely  fond  of  smoking:  morning,  noon,  and 
night  he  would  bring  out  his  little  bit  of  cotton,  strike  the  stones  together,  make  fire, 
and  then  light  his  tobacco.  Even  when  walking  out  in  the  bush  he  would  continue 
smoking.  While  thus  trudging  through  the  forest  one  day  and  puffing  out  clouds 
of  smoke,  Mawdii,  one  of  the  Yurokons,  or  Bush  Spirits,  smelt  the  tobacco,  and, 
taking  such  a  fancy  to  it,  sent  hia  daughter  to  fetch  the  man  in.  She  was  a  pretty 
woman  and,  approaching  the  Indian,  asked  him  whither  he  was  going.  He  told  her 
he  was  searching  for  game,  but  she  advised  him  to  come  with  her  to  her  father's  place; 
in  fact  she  warned  him  that  as  the  old  Bush  Spirit  had  really  sent  for  him,  it  woixld  be 
wiser  on  his  part  not  to  refuse.  And  perhaps  because  she  was  indeed  so  pretty,  he 
did  not  hesitate  to  accompany  her.  When  he  reached  her  home,  Mawiri.  asked  him  a 
lot  of  questions  about  the  tobacco,  and  begged  him  to  teach  him  how  to  smoke.  Having 
learned  the  art,  and  taken  a  violent  fancy  to  it,  MawAri  next  insisted  upon  the  Indian 
remaining,  and  preparing  the  tobacco  leaves  as  they  might  be  required.  And  so  it 
came  to  pass  that  the  latter  took  up  his  abode  with  the  Bush  Spirits  as  the  son-in-law 
of  a  Yurokon.  When  he  was  given  the  alligator  stool  to  sit  upon,  he  felt  a  bit  scared, 
but  his  wife  told  him  not  to  be  afraid,  because  the  creatiure  would  not  bite  him.'  He 
remained  a  long  time  with  these  Spirits,  so  long  indeed  that  a  luxuriant  growth  of  hair 
began  to  cover  his  face,  body,  and  limbs.  His  marital  relations  prospered,  Mawiri's 
daughter  in  the  meanwhile  having  borne  him  three  children.  One  day  his  wife 
advised  him  to  go  visit  his  mother,  so,  making  ready  for  the  journey,  he  started  off. 
On  reaching  his  old  home,  his  mother  was  very  glad  to  see  him,  but  noticing  how 
he  was  covered  all  oyer  with  hair,  remarked,  "Where  have  you  been  all  this  while? 
You  have  turned  into  a  Yurokon,  I  think."  Although  her  surmises  were  not  very  far 
from  the  truth,  her  son  denied  all  knowledge  of  those  people,  and  thought  it  prudent 
not  to  remain  too  long  in  case  he  should  be  asked  some  more  equally  awkward  ques- 
tions. And  when  he  took  his  departure,  he  carried  away  with  Kim  the  cassava 
which  his  mother  had  baked;  but  neither  he  nor  his  wife  ate  of  it,  he  having  become 
so  accustomed  now  to  the  various  bush  fruits  and  she  never  touching  that  kind  of 
food .  The  Indian  never  returned  home  again  to  his  mother ,  being  ever  busy  preparing 
the  tobacco  for  his  father-in-law. 

133.  Whenever  my  Indian  friends  wished  to  impress  me  with  the 
power  and  importance  of  any  of  their  legendary  beings,  they  invaria- 
bly ascribed  to  it  great  size:  thus,  a  black  tiger  as  big  as  a  house 
meant  a  very  dangerous  brute;  a  bat  as  big  as  a  tree  indicated 
the  "vampire,"  that  sucks  people's  blood  at  night  with  fatal  results. 
I  learned  that  for  similar. reasons  these  Forest  Spirits  are  always 
associated  with  unusually  big  things  (Sects.  27, 147) .  Both  Axawaks 
andWarraus  have  a  story  of  this  nature:  I  attach  the  former  version. 

1  Tbe  stool  upon  which  the  Carib  medicine-mau  sits  during  the  incantation  is  generally  In  the  Jorm  of 
an  alligator. 


HOTH]  THE    SPIRITS   OF   THE   BUSH  193 

The  Bush  Spirit  with  Big  Ideas  (A) 

A  Konoko-kuyuka,  meeting  a  man  one  day  far  out  in  the  bush,  asked  him  what  he 
was  doing  there.  Learning  that  he  had  come  to  hunt,  he  told  him  to  go  and  catch 
some  akara  (a  species  of  black  land  crab).  After  a  while  he  returned  to  the  banab 
bringing  some  with  him,  but  when  the  Spirit  saw  them,  he  said  those  were  not  the 
kind  he  required.  "Come  with  me.  I  will  show  you  what  I  want."  With  this, 
he  led  the  huntsman  to  a  big  hole  in  the  ground,  put  his  right  arm  in,  and  pulled  out 
two  armadillos.  "This  is  the  sort  of  akara  that  I  need.  What  you  brought  me  were 
only  spiders."  They  returned  to  the  banab,  when  the  Spirit  told  him  to  go  and  fetch 
some  cassava.  Proceeding  to  the  nearest  house,  the  man  soon  returned  with  a  few 
cassava  cakes,  but  these  were  not  what  the  Spirit  wanted.  They  went  to  a  neigh- 
boring tree,  where,  pointing  to  an  immense  toad-stool,  the  Konoko-kuyuha  changed 
it  into  a  cassava  cake,  explaining  that  this  was  what  he  meant.'  The  Spirit  then  sent 
him  for  a  cooking-pot,  telling  him  that  he  would  find  one  lying  among  the  roots  of  a 
certain  tree,  which  he  described  to  him.  The  man  went  as  directed,  but  could  see 
only  a  bush-master  snake.  When  he  came  back,  and  reported  what  he  had  seen,  the 
Spirit  said:  "  Didn't  you  notice  that  the  snake  was  coiled  up  like  a  pot?  Why  didn't 
you  bring  it  as  you  were  told?"  So  the  man  again  went  on  his  way,  and  when  he 
reached  the  spot,  lo  and  behold!  there  was  a  real  cooking-pot  painted  in  all  the  colors 
of  the  snake.  When  he  had  brought  it  to  the  banab,  the  Spirit  told  him  to  bring 
firewood  next.  This  he  did,  but  when  the  Spirit  saw  it,  he  slid,  "That  is  not  what 
I  asked  you  for."  So  he  took  the  man.with  him  to  a  big  dead  tree,  shook  it  a  little, 
and  made  it  fall,  and  then  carried  it  to  where  they  were  camped.  "That  is  what  / 
call  firewood,"  he  said:  "What  you  brought  me  was  only  birds'  nests!"  At  any 
rate,  they  both  soon  had  the  fire  lighted,  and  the  armadillos  cooked.  The  Spirit  ate 
all  his  up  in  a  few  mouthfuls,  but  the  man  could  eat  only  a  portion  of  his.  "^^Tiy 
haven't  you  finished  yours?  "  remarked  the  former;  "  No  wonder  you  Indians  are  so 
thin.  Look  at  me.  I  am  big  and  fat  and  strong  because  I  have  swallowed  the  whole 
of  my  armadillo.'"  Having  rested  in  their  hammocks,  they  started  hunting  again, 
and  by  evening  time  returned  with  a  large  quantity  of  game.  Allien  their  bellies 
were  satisfied,  they  stacked  and  smoked  the  remainder  of  the  meat  on  the  babra- 
cote.  After  they  had  retired  for  the  night,  the  Spirit  said  that  he  expected  a  tiger 
would  come  to  steal  the  meat,  and  therefore  instructed  the  man  to  keep  good  watch. 
By  and  by,  the  tiger  came,  and  the  man  accordingly  woke  the  Konoko-kuyuha. 
Raising  himself  from  his  hammock  to  get  a  better  look  at  the  creature,  the  Spirit  said: 
"That  is  no  tiger.  That  is  what  I  call  a  yawarri"  (opossum,  Didelphys  sp.),  and 
turned  round  to  resume  his  slumbers.  The  man  pondered  over  all  this  for  a  long  time, 
and  remarked:  "Well,  if  by  my  kind  of  tiger  he  means  a  yawarri,  what  sort  of  a  thing 
does  he  mean  by  his  kind  of  tiger?"  He  thus  became  much  frightened,  and  cleared 
out,  leaving  Konoko-kuyuha  in  the  hammock. 

134.  To  conclude  this  natural  history,  so  to  speak,  of  the  Spirits  of 
the  Forest,  it  may  be  mentioned  that,  with  very  rare  exceptions, 
as  the  Mansinskiri  (Sect.  97),  they  shrink  from  exposure  to  sunlight 
or  firelight,  from  hearing  their  names  called,  or  particulars  of  theii 
origin  talked  about.  This  idea  explains  why  an  Indian  will  almost 
invariably  refuse  to  tell  these  spirit-legends  in  the  daytime,  when 

'According  to  Dance  (p.  202),  the  large  woody  fungi  growing  out  of  the  fallen  and  decayed  trunks  of  trees 
are  named  by  the  Demerara  River  Arawaks  "kamara-sana"  and  also  the  "Bush-deril's  cassava  bread." 

>  In  the  Warrau  version  of  this  story  the  Bush  Spirit  asks  the  man  to  bring  him  peppers,  but  he  means 
ascorpion;  then  a  hammoclt,  but  he  means  a  tiger,  whose  color-stripes  represent  tlie  cotton  "cross-ties;" 
and  finally  a  hammock-rope,  but  he  means  a  snake. 
15961°— 30  BTH— 16 13 


194  4NIMISM  AND  FOLK-LOEB  OF  GUIANA  INDIANS   [bth.  ann.  30 

he  might  be  heard  by  the  particular  Spirit  spoken  about  and  subse-' 
quently   be   mysteriously   punished.^    There    are    certainly   many 
examples  in  the  Indian  folk-lore  illustrative  of  the  dire  results  conse- 
quent on  mentioning  either  the  Spirit's  name  or  his  particular  origin 
(Sects.  99,  133,  135,  176). 

135.  To  mimic  the  sounds  of  their  voices  is  of  course  as  bad  as 
laughing  at  Spirits  (Sect.  69)  or  mentioning  their  names. 

The  Woman  Who  Mimicked  the  Bush  Spikit  (A) 

A  man  went  out  hunting  one  day,  taking  hia  wife  with  him.^  Leaving  her  one 
morning  at  the  banab,  he  warned  her  that  a  Yawahu  would  be  passing,  and  that  it 
would  be  whistling  like  a  bird,  but  that  she  must  not  imitate  the  sound  in  any  way, 
because  if  she  did  each,  of  her  feet  immediately  would  be  turned  into  a  sharp  piece 
of  stone.  She  had  been  by  herself  some  time  when  she  heard  a  bird  whistling,  and 
feeling  somewhat  lonely  without  any  company,  thought  she  would  ' '  call  "it.  No  sooner 
had  she  imitated  the  sound  than  the  Yawahu,  which  it  really  was,  became  extremely 
angry,  and  changed  her  feet  into  two  sharp-pointed  stones  (c/.  Sect.  1^6):  more  than 
this,  the  Spirit  changed  her  heart  into  "Stone  also,  thus  making,  her  "wild"  toward 
her  husband.  The  result  was,  that  when  her  husband  joined  her  in  the  afternoon, 
she  tried  to  kill  him,  but  he,  recognizing  at  a  glance  what  had  happened,  turned 
on  his  heels  and  ran  as  fast  as  possible  doTO  to  the  creek,  into  which  he  ducked 
and  dived  across;  coming  up  on  the  opposite  bank,  he  rested  himself  awhile.  It  was 
not  long  before  she  reached  the  creek,  and  failing  to  see  her  husband,  concluded  that 
he  must  be  in  hiding  somewhere  among  the  rushes  and  mud,  which  she  trampled  in 
all  directions  with  her  stony  spikes.  Stamping  here  and  there,  she  gave  vent  to  her 
wrath  every  now  and  again,  saying:  "You  brute!  Wait  till  I  catch  you.  I  know 
what,  I'll  do  with  you."  She  little  knew  that  her  husband  was  listening,  and 
smiHng  at  her  all  the  while.  And  so  she  continued  stamping  and  swearing  imtil 
she  at  last  stuck  one  of  her  feet  into  an  alligator  that  was  lying  there,  and  hauled  it 
up  on  the  bank,  "sticking''  it  again  and  again,  in  the  full  belief  that  it  was  her 
husband.  Thoroughly  satisfied  with  her  work,  she  now  returned  to  the  banab,  her 
man  making  tracks  for  home.  But  when  he  got  there,  his  brothers-in-law  inquired 
of  their  sister,  and  would  not  believe  what  her  husband  said  about  her  having  mim- 
•  icked  the  Yawahu,  and  her  feet  being  changed  into  stone.  Finally  they  tried  to  kill 
him.  Seeing  that  they  were  threatening  him,  he  offered  to  show  them  the  actual 
place  where  it  all  happened.  This  being  agreed  to,  they  took  up  their  bows  and 
arrows  to  follow  him,  and  finally  reached  the  banab.  No  wife  was  there.  So  the 
husband  imitated  the  Yawahu's  whistle — ^now  that  the  Spirit  was  nowhere  in  the  neigh- 
borhood and  well  out  of  hearing,  no  harm  could  follow — and  who  should  come  running 
up  but  his  stone-footed  wife,  storming  with  rage,  ready  to  destroy  not  only  her  man 
but  her  brothers  also.  The  latter,  however,  being  forewarned,  put  an  arrow  into 
her,  and  she  fell  dead;  they  knew  now  that  the  man  had  spoken  the  truth. 

■ s ■ _ , 

1  We  ourselves  are  blessed  witli  a  corresponding  weakness  in  believing  that  the  best  occasion  for  a  real 
good  ghost-story  is  when  gathered  around  the  fireside,  and  that  there  is  much  truth  in  the  old  adage,  "Talk 
of  the  Devil,  and  He  is  sure  to  appear." 

2  A  man  never  takes  his  wife  or  child  with  him  on  the  actual  hunt,  where  one  or  the  other  would  only 
be  in  his  way.  She  always  accompanies  him  if  he  proposes  being  out  some  days,  when  he  will  leave  her 
during  the  daytime  at  the  temporary  shed,  or  banab,  while  he  himself  searches  the  neighborhood  for  game 
returning  to  her  before  nightfall.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  even  when  men  join  together  on  a  hunting  expedi- 
tion, and  the  banab  has  been  made,  it  is  the  rule  rather  than  the  exception  for  each  to  go  his  own  way  and 
thus  the  better  scour  the  surrounding  country  in  all  directions.  It  is  the  wife's  business,  if  present,  to 
erect  the  babracote,  as  well  as  dry  and  cook  the  food. 


BOTH]  THE   SPIRITS   OF  THE  BUSH  195 

136.  And  so,  when  all  is  said  and  done,  it  is  just  as  well  that  we 
should  be  circumspect  in  our  conduct  and  not  incur  the  enmity, 
with  all  its  attendant  consequences,  of  these  denizens  of  the  forest. 
Indeed,  it  is  far  better  to  keep  out  of  the  clutches  of  these  Spirits 
altogether,  and  give  them  a  wide  berth.  Just  consider,  for  instance, 
what  happened  to  the  Warrau  who  woHild  insist  on  associating 
with  them. 

The  Danger  of  Associating  with  Spieits  (W) 

There  were  two  brothers  living  together,  both  of  whom  used  to  go  hunting.  During 
the  course  of  the  day,  when  deep  in  the  heart  of  the  forest,  they  heard  the  sounds 
and  revelry  of  a  drinkicg-party,  and  this  made  the  elder  one  say,  "Come,  let  us  go 
sport  with  those  people."  But  the  younger  one  replied,  "No!  It  can  not  be  a  real 
party  out  here  in  the  bush  away  from  everybody:  it  can  not  possibly  be  proper  people 
who  are  sporting;  they  must  be  Spirits  of  some  sort."  Now  the  big  brother  insisted, 
and,  proceeding  in  the  direction  whence  the  sounds  came,  they  reached  a  house 
where  apparently  real  people  were  much  enjoying  themselves.  The  \-iBitors  were 
made  to  sit  down  and  drinks  were  handed  to  them.  The  elder  one  indulged  and 
was  happy;  the  younger  refused  because  he  was  afraid  of  what  might  happen  to  him. 
As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  latter's  suspicions  were  correct,  because  the  people  at  the 
house  who  were  sporting  were  really  not  people  after  all  but  the  Spirits  of  the  Warekki, 
or  large  Rain-frogs,  who  had  taken  on  human  shapes.'  After  awhile,  both  the  men 
came  away,  and  as  night  was  fast  approaching  they  made  themselves  a  banab,  and 
the  elder  sent  the  younger  to  fetch  firewood;  he  did  so.  WTien  the  banab  had  been 
built  and  the  fire  lighted,  they  slung  their  hammocks.  By  and  by,  the  elder  brother 
told  the  younger  to  put  some  more  wood  on  the  fire,  and  when  he  had  done  so,  told 
him  that  it  was  not  enough:  again  he  told  him  the  same  thing,  and  still  once  more 
the  same,  so  that  with  all  the  extra  fuel  there  was  an  immense  fire  blazing  away  now. 
After  some  time  the  younger  man  smelt  a  very  peculiar  strong  odor,  and  looking  around, 
saw  his  brother's  legs  hanging  from  out  his  hammock  close  over  the  fire.  "Look  out! 
your  legs  are  getting  scorched."  But  all  his  brother  did  was  to  say,  Akka'l  Ahha't ' 
and  draw  his  feet  into  the  hammock.  And  it  was  not  long  before  he  again  put  his 
feet  into  danger,  a  fact  which,  considering  that  he  had  not  been  drunk  at  the 
party,  led  the  vigilant  brother  to  know  that  it  was  a  token  of  some  evil  about 
to  befall  them.  At  any  rate,  the  latter,  seeing  that  his  warning  was  disregarded, 
bothered  no  more  about  the  matter,  but  let  his  brother's  feet  continue  burning. 
After  a  while,  their  owner  realized  for  himself  that  his  lower  Umbs  were  pretty 
well  charred,  and,  looking  down,  saw  that  both  feet  were  entirely  gone,  and  most 
of  the  flesh  around  the  shin-bones  destroyed.  All  he  did  was  to  clean -the  flesh  ofi 
in  its  entirety,  and  then,  with  his  knife,  scrape  both  shin-bones  down  to  sharp 
points  (c/.  Sect.  125).  There  he  lay  helpless  in  his  hammock.  He  could  not  hunt 
any  more,  though  it  is  true  that  now  and  again  when  a  bird  flew  past,  or  any  little 
animal  ran  along,  he  would  cock  out  a  leg  and  spear  it  with  the  pointed  tip,  a  trick 
in  which  he  soon  got  very  expert.' 

127.  His  younger  brother  would  sometimes  carry  him  carefully  to  the  shade  of 
some  bullet  tree,  and  then  climb  the  trunk  and  shake  the  branches,  so  as  to  enable  him 

1  These  Raia-frogs  are  peculiar  in  that  they  make  an  especially  loud  noise  at  the  time  of  the  first  rainy 
season,  after  which  they  cease. 

« This  is  an  exclamation  denoting  astonishment  or  surprise. 

» In  a  Carib  version  of  the  story,  it  is  a  Yurokon  by  name  of  Araiyok<5  who  gives  the  brother  his  pointed 
feet,  by  way  of  punishment. 


196  ANIMISM   AND   FOLK-LORE   OF   GTJIANA   INDIANS    [eth.  ANN.  30 

to  pick  the  fruit  as  it  fell  to  the  ground.  At  other  times  he  would  shoot  little  birds 
for  him,  so  much  that  feathered  game  soon  got  to  be  very  scarce  in  the  immediate 
neighborhood,  and  herein  began  the  trouble.  The  sick  man  never  liked  his  brother  to 
be  out  of  sight  and  would  always  be  calling  him  back,  even  before  he  had  an  opportu- 
nity of  letting  fly  his  arrow.  At  last  the  latter  became  exasperated  at  being  continually 
called  back  before  even  taking  a  shot,  and  yet  was  afraid  of  running  away  because 
his  brother  had  threatened  to  kill  him  should  he  ever  dare  to  go  out  of  his  sight:  he 
only  waited  his  chance  and  it  was  not  long  in  coming.  One  day  he  said:  "Brother! 
Don't  shout  out  for  me  just  now,  because  my  arrow  has  stuck  \ip  in  a  tree  which  I 
must  go  cKmb.  It  will  be  some  time  before  I  can  possibly  return."  All  this  how- 
ever was  a  lie,  an  excuse  under  cover  of  which  he  considered  he  could  get  away  in 
safety.  -The  sick  man  waited  and  waited  in  his  hammock  and  at  last  holloa'd;  but 
no  brother  came.  Again  and  again  he  holloa'd,  he  shouted,  and  he  screamed;  still 
no  brother  came.  He  slipped  out  of  his  hammock  and  started  in  pursuit;  to  his 
astonishment  he  found  that  with  his  bone  points  he  could  travel  a  great  deal  faster 
than  he  covild  before  on  his  feet.  Thus  walking  and  running,  running  and  walking, 
along  his  brother's  tracks,  he  started  a  deer.  Mistaking  the  trail  of  the  latter  for  that 
of  his  brother,  he  followed  the  creature  and,  soon  getting  within  reach,  threw  himseU 
upon  it  and  pinned  it  with  his  bone  points  to  the  ground.  And  as  he  stuck  it  here 
and  there,  he  excused  himself  by  saying,  "I  am  sorry,  Brother,  to  have  killed 
you,  but  it  is  your  own  fault;  you  tried  to  run  away  and  leave  me."  On  turning 
over  the  carcass,  he  noticed  the  animal's  black  mouth.  "Ah!  That  has  got  stained 
from  the  bullet-tree  fruit."  But  on  looking  at  the  fore-legs  he  noticed  something 
strange.  "Eh?  Let  me  count  the  fingers — one,  two,  three.  Now,  how  many  have 
I? — One,  two,  three — ^four!  five!!  Let  me  look  at  the  foot  now.  It  has  toes — one, 
two,  three.  I'll  count  mine  now.  One,  two,  three — four!  five!!"  And  thus  he 
pondered  and  finally  concluded  that  the  creature  he  had  just  slain  could  not  possibly 
be  his  brother  (Sect.  ;?6).  He  thereupon  returned  to  his  banab,  where  he  laid  himself 
in  his  hammock. 

128.  In  the  meantime  the  fugitive  reached  home  and  told  the  others:  "Something 
has  happened  to  my  brother.  We  can  not  be  friends  with  him  any  more.  We  must 
kill  him."  So,  leading  the  way,  the  others  followed  him  into  the  bush  where  they 
surrounded  the  banab  under  which  the  elder  brother  was  resting.  They  were  afraid 
to  attack  him  where  he  was,  because  of  the  skilful  way  he  could  use  his  bone-points 
as  spears:  their  idea  was  to  tempt  him  out  into  the  open,  where  he  would  have  to 
use  these  bones  of  his  as  feet,  so  they  would  be  enabled  to  attack  him  with  impunity. 
Thus,  by  sending  a  swift-flying  bird  to  hover  around  his  hammock,  he  would  be  sure 
to  try  to  pin  it  in  his  customary  fashion,  and  of  course  missing  his  aim,  would  jump 
out  of  his  hammock  in  pursuit.  With  this  design  in  view,  they  sent  him  a  little 
huku-huku  (hummingbird),  which  flew  here,  there,  and  in  all  directions  around  his 
hammock;  but  it  was  not  swift  enough,  and  after  many  trials  he  succeeded  in  spearing 
it.  So  they  sent  him  hflra  {Sciurus  sestuans),  the  little  squirrel  (Arawak,  shimo- 
ok6ri),  which  is  much  swifter  in  its  movements  than  the  huku-huku.  He  had  a 
good  many  chances,  but  every  time  it  passed  and  repassed  his  hammock,  the  bone- 
point  missed  its  mark,  and  thus  the  little  creature  decoyed  him  out  onto  the  open, 
closer  and  closer  to  the  ring  of  people  around.  And  when  he  got  quite  near,  they 
fell  upon  and  destroyed  him. 

139.  Should  unforeseen  circumstances,  however,  force  one  into 
close  quarters  with  Bush  Spirits,  various  procedures  may  be  adopted 
to  get  rid  of  them.  Warraus  and  Makusis  took  measures  to  exorcise 
evil  spirits  from  the  dancing-ground.  Schomburgk  describes  how 
this  was  effected  by  the  former  tribe:  Proceeding  slowly  to  the 
spot  chosen,  with  clanging  Thevetia  seeds,  the  Hoho-hit,  or  Master 


BOTH]  THE   SPIRITS   OF    THE   BUSH  197 

of  the  Ceremonies,  etc.,  blew  upon  a  small  flute,  in  imitation  of  a 
monkey's  voice,  which  regulated  the  movement.  Keaching  there, 
the  others  made  a  circle  round  him,  when  a  second  signal  on  the  flute 
warned  them  aU  to  lay  their  instruments  on  the  ground,  and  bend 
themselves  down,  until  he  had  miirmured  some  unintelligible  words. 
At  a  third  signal  they  picked  up  their  instruments,  straightened 
themselves,  and  were  now  allowed  to  pipe  away  (ScR,  i,  153).  With 
the  Makusis,  a  deafening  universal  shout,  like  dogs  howling,  constitutes 
on  every  occasion  the  introduction  and  finale  of  their  combined 
games  and  dances  wherewith  to  expel  the  evil  spirits  from  the  neigh- 
borhood (ScR,  n,  194).  A  somewhat  similar  coiu^e  was  followed  on 
the  Orinoco  at  the  wedding  festivities  of  the  Guayquiries  and  Mapojes. 
As  soon  as  day  breaks,  there  comes  from  the  bush  close  at  hand  a 
dancing  party  with  flutes  and  kettledrums,  which  circuits  backward 
and  forward  round  the  houses  of  the  brides,  whence  presently  there 
emerges  an  old  woman  with  a  plate  of  food,  which  she  presents  to 
one  of  the  dancers;  they  then  all  return  at  top  speed  to  the  bush, 
where,  scattering  the  plate  And  food,  one  of  them  will  shout,  "Here! 
you  devil  of  a  dog  (perro  demonio) !  Take  this  food,  and  don't  come 
and  upset  our  fun!"  (G,  i,  160).  To  prevent  the  Bush  Spirits  com- 
ing into  the  house,  a  hunter,  on  his  return  from  the  chase,  will  shout 
out  the  name  Shimarabu-akaradani  (Sect.  95)  before  entering  (Sect. 
124-)-  Other  methods  may  be  adopted  for  withstanding  the  venge- 
ance of  the  Spirits  of  those  animals  which  the  hunter  has  just 
returned  from  slaughtering  (Sect.  84S).  An  alligator  skuU  stuck  up 
in  a  Carib  house  will  prevent  the  Yurokon  entering  it  (Sect.  £51). 

130.  So  also,  when  traveling  in  the  bush,  forest,  and  other  places, 
where  all  these  Spirits  are  lurking,  one  should  never  be  without  a 
companion,  and  it  is  always  advisable  to  satisfy  oneself  as  to  the 
cause  and  origin  of  any  unusual  sound.  "The  Indian  always  prefers 
to  travel  in  large  nimibers:  his  dread  of  evil  spirits  is  so  great,  that  he 
wUl  subject  himself  to  great  inconvenience  rather  than  travel  alone" 
(ScG,  2 6-').  ^"It  is  a  duty  to  one's  self  to  turn  and  look  about 
when  a  stick  falls  from  a  tree,  or  when  a  crackling  of  twigs  is  heard: 
for  there  walk  together  always  a  bad  and  a  good  spirit  (Sect.  84) — 
the  one  wishing  to  injure,  the  other  to  protect  living  people.  At 
sight  of  any  one  in  the  forest  or  on  the  river,  the  evil  spirit  is  ready  to 
harm:  but  the  good  spirit  says,  'Stay!  he  may  be  a  friend  of  mine. 
Let  us  see  if  he  will  show  his  face  when  1  call. '  He  then  breaks  a 
twig  or  a  branch.  The  person  is  saved  from  harm  if  he  looks 
aroimd,  but  is  in  danger  of  being  hurt  if  he  will  not  look."  (Da,  262.) 
Whenever  Indians — Warraus  and  others — traveling  in  the  bush  hear 
any  unusual  crv-  or  uncanny  noise,  they  will  sing  out,  "Show  who 
you  are,  or  else  bring  something  to  eat!"  or  some  similar  expression 
(Sects.  116,  ISO).  If  a  Spirit  is  met  on  the  road,  the  Caribs  know 
how  to  divert  its  attention  (Sect.  109)  with  a  string  puzzle. 


198  ANIMISM   AND   FOLK-LORE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS    [eth.  ANN.  30 

The  Eain-frog  Wife  (W) 

A  party  of  hunters  were  walking  along  the  pathway  in  the  bush,  one  behind  the 
other,  the  hindermost  being  a  long  way  apart  from  the  others.  He  heard  the  smaller 
Eain-frog  [ho-haWa]  croaking,  so  he  shouted,  "Don'-t  make  such  a  noise,  Ho-ha'ra, 
but  come  out  and  show  yourself! "  and  Ho-haxa  came  up  from  behind  in  the  shape  of  a 
woman.  "Who  calls  me?  You?"  "Yes,  I  called  you;  you  are  a  nice  wench,  too, 
and  had  better  come  home  with  me."  She  being  agreeable,  went  home,  and  lived 
with  him  a  long  time.  But  his  people  were  continually  nagging  at  her.  You  see,  being 
really  a  frog,  she  had  no  waist,  her  hips  were  narrow  and  her  foot  was  long;  and  accord- 
ingly her  step-parents  would  always  be  calling  her  names,  as  "Froggie,  where's  your 
waist?  "  "  Small-hip, "  "  Lanky-foot. "  Her  Ufe,  once  full  of  joy,  was  now  replete  with 
misery,  so  she  determined  upon  returning  to  her  own  people.  She  went  into  the  bush, 
and  her  man,  following  the  trail,  got  almost  in  touch  with  her;  but  just  then  she 
jumped  into  a  little  puddle  and  disappeared .  He  put  his  hand  in,  and  felt  all  the  way 
round,  but  no  further  tiace  of  her  could  he  find.  You  can  always  hear  her,  however, 
at  the  commencement  of  the  rainy  season. 


Chapter  IX 

THE  SPIRITS  OF  THE  BUSH 

Animals  as  Sentient  Httmav  Beings 

Preliminary  {ISOA).    Fables,  Tales,  and  Legends  {1S1-162D). 

130A.  It  is  proposed  to  devote  this  chapter  to  a  collection  of 
legends  dealing  with  the  many  beasts  and  birds  inet  with  in  the 
forest,  interesting  in  that  they  are  aU  represented  as  thinking,  talking, 
and  acting  as  do  sentient  human  beings.  They  are  also  believed  to 
possess  Spirits  just  like  those  of  human  folk.  At  the  same  time  we 
must  not  be  surprised  to  learn  that  the  events  and  occurrences  now 
about  to  be  recorded  are  supposed  to  have  taken  place  a  long  while 
ago;  but  in  those  days,  so  the  Akawais  say,  Makunaima  made  man 
and  animal  all  of  one  speech,  advising  them  to  live  in  unity,  and  judg- 
ing by  the  legends  here  narrated  the  injunction  seems  to  have  been 
fairly  well  obeyed.  To  put  the  matter  shortly,  these  creatures  with 
human  ideas  were  born  so:  they  "growed."  True  it  is  that  now  and 
again  the  fact  of  the  human  actor  having  an  animal  form,  or  the 
animal  an  anthropomorphic  one,  is  explained  as  being  due  to  reasons 
already  stated,  i.  e.,  by  way  of  punishment  or  pure  devUment  at  the 
instigation  of  the  Spirit  of  some  person  departed.  It  is  also  a  firm 
article  of  faith  that  the  medicine-man,  to  whom  nothing  is  impossible, 
can  eflfect  transformation  of  himself  or  others,  similar  to  those  pro- 
duced by  the  Spirits.  In  addition,  there  is  a  widespread  Indian 
belief  that  at  every  eclipse  of  the  moon  animals  are  metamorphosed — 
a  tapir  may  change  into  a  snake,  a  man  into  a  beast,  and  vice  versa. 
And  so  even  in  the  telling  of  these  stories,  the  Indian  expects  his 
hearers  to  take  quite  as  a  matter  of  course — ^just  in  the  same  way 
as  he  is  firmly  convinced  himself — that  animals  and  birds  associate 
with  man;  that  they  are  all  of  one  and  the  same  breed;  that  they 
may  equally  live,  eat,  and  drink,  love,  hate,  and  die.  It  is  small 
wonder  then  that  the  Indian  folk-lore  is  so  largely  crammed  with 
this  same  idea  of  Man  and  Animal  (used  in  its  widest  sense)  being 
so  intimately  interchangeable. 

131.  The  Honey-bee  Son-in-law  (W) 

A  man  made  up  a  little  family  party  to  accompany  him  on  a  hunting  expedition, 
taking  with  him  his  two  sons  and  a  daughter;  he  left  his  wife  and  the  other  two  girls 
at  home.  He  took  the  party  far  out  into  the  bush,  where  they  constructed  a  banab 
and  rested  themselves.  Next  day  the  girl  told  her  father  that  she  was  not  feeling 
well,  in  other  words,  that  it  was  not  permissible  for  her  to  build  the  babracote,  to  do 

199 


200  ANIMISM   AND   FOLK-LOBE   OF   GUIANA   INDIANS    [bth.  ann.  30 

the  cooHng,  or  even  to  touch  the  utensils  [Sect.  274].  "Never  mind,"  replied  the 
father,  "just  rest  yourself.  We  are  not  going  very  far,  and  we  can  manage  for  our- 
selves." That  afternoon  they  returned  from  the  hunt  with  nothing,  the  same  result 
happening  on  the  succeeding  afternoon.  Was  the  young  woman  the  unfortunate 
cause  of  their  bad  luck?  Next  morning,  the  huntsmen  went  into  the  bush  as  usual, 
and,  not  long  after  they  had  gone,  the  girl,  who  was  lying  in  her  hammock,  was  some- 
what startled  at  seeing  a  young  man  approach  the  banab  and  stride  up  to  where  she  was 
resting;  she  became  very  angry  when  he  jumped  in.  She  fought  and  wrestled  with 
him,  informed  him  of  her  condition,  and  tried  to  get  out,  threatening  what  her  father 
would  do  when  he  returned.  But  he  held  her  firmly,  assured  her  that  he  had  not 
the  slightest  intention  of  troubling  hei^  that  he  had  come  only  to  rest  himself,  and 
promised  to  ask  the  old  man  for  possession  of  her  in  the  proper  manner.  So  they  both 
lay  there  quietly  in  the  hammock,  discussing  their  respective  prospects  and  affairs. 
She  learned  from  him  that  he  had  been  long  in  love  with  her,  and  that  he  was  a  Simo- 
ahawara  [lit.  'bee  tribe'];  this  information  calmed  her  greatly,  because  it  seems  that 
at  his  first  appearance  she  took  him  for  a  Bush  Spirit  or  Hebu.^  Now,  just  as  Simo 
had  anticipated,  when  the  father  returned  in  the  afternoon,  he  was  not  at  all  vexed 
at  seeing  the  stranger  in  his  daughter's  hammock;  in  fact,  he  made  not  the  slightest 
reference  to  her  even  having  company.  And  when  on  the  following  morning  Simo 
asked  the  old  man  for  her,  the  latter  told  him  he  could  have  her  if  he  desired,  and  the 
girl  consenting,  he  was  received  as  a  son-in-law.  Being  now  one  of  the  family,  so  to 
speak,  he  told  all  three  men  to  remain  in  their  hammocks,  as  he  would  make  himself 
responsible  for  supplying  them  with  their  evening  meal.  Carrying  his  bow  with  two 
arrows,  he  accordingly  took  himself  off  to  the  bush,  and  returning  very  shortly, 
instructed  the  girl  to  tell  her  father  go  fetch  in  the  game  which  he  had  killed.^  The 
father  went  off  to  fetch  the  waiyarri  in  which  Simo  had  packed  the  meat,  but  could  • 
not  lift  it,  much  less  carry  it,  on  account  of  its  great  weight,  though  comparatively 
small  a  bundle.  He  came  back  for  his  two  sons  to  help  him,  but  all  three  together 
could  not  raise  it  from  the  ground.  When  they  returned  to  the  banab,  the  old  man 
told  his  daughter  what  had  occurred  and  asked  her  to  get  Simo  to  bring  up  the 
bundle:  the  latter  accordingly  went,  but  not  before  telling  his  father-in-law,  through 
his  wife,  to  get  the  babracote  ready.  As  soon  as  Simo  brought  in  the  bundle,  one  of 
his  brothers-in-law  loosened  the  vine  rope  and-,  opening  the  bundle,  brought  out  of 
it  one  of  every  kind  of  bird  and  beast  imaginable^  They  had  plenty  there  to  last 
them  for  months,  and  it  took  all  three  men  a  long  time  to  clean  and  cut  up  the  flesh 
and  get  it  properly  smoked.  And  when  all  the  meat  was  dried,  they  started  on  their 
homeward  journey,  Simo  arranging  for  the  old  man  and  the  brothers-in-law  to  carry 
all  they  could,  he  following  later  on  with  the  remainder,  which  as  a  matter  of  fact 
was  five  times  greater  than  all  their  loads  put  together.  You  see  what  a  strong  man 
he  must  have  beenl  And  although  he  gave  them  a  good  start  he  speedily  caught  up 
with  them  on  the  road,  and  they  all  went  home  together,  Simo  taking  up  his  residence, 
as  is  customary,  at  his  father-in-law's  place.  About  a  year  later  Simo  found  himself 
the  proud  father  of  a  beautiful  baby  boy;  in  the  meantime  he  had  been  busy  clearing 
his  field.  Now  it  was  just  about  this  time  that  his  two  sisters-in-law  were  beginning 
to  give  trouble:  they  had  fallen  in  love  with  him  and  were  always  jumping  into  his 
hammock,  but  as  fast  as  they  got  in,  he  would  turn  them  out.  He  neither-liked  nor 
wanted  them,  and  complaiued  to  his  wife  about  their  conduct.     Of  course  there  was 

>  This  oftafflora  is  the  Warrau  term  for  race,  nation,  tribe,  etc.;  thus  Arawak-u  oftowora  signifies  the 
Arawak  nation. 

'  Three  Indian  customs  are  involved  in  this  action:  (a)  The  wife  was  tabooed  from  touching  the  meat, 
owing  to  her  physiological  condition  (Sect.  «7i).  (6)  Her  newly-acquired  husband  must  not  bring  it 
Into  the  house,  otherwise  he  would  lose  his  luck  in  hunting  that  particular  animal  (Sect.  eU)-  (c)  A 
man  and  his  father-in-law,  though  they  may  converse  in  a  friendly  enough  manner  on  everyday  general 
topics,  must  never  give  each  other  any  orders  or  instructions  except  through  the  medium  of  the  wife,  she 
being  the  go-between,  so  to  speak. 


BOTH]  THE   SPIKITS   OF    THE   BUSH  201 

nothing  wrong  in  what  her  sisters  were  trjriiig  to  do,  because  with  us  Indians,  so  long 
as  the  women  are  single,  it  is  no  sin  for  a  man  to  live  with  his  sisters-in-law  as  well 
as  with  his  wife.'  But  in  spite  of  his  objections,  the  two  sisters-in-law  persisted 
in  following  him  about,  and  while  they  would  be  bathing  with  his  wife  at  the  water- 
aide,  with  him  minding  the  baby  on  the  river-bank,  they  would  trj-  to  dash-spray 
over  him. 2  This  was  very  wicked'of  them,  still  more  so  because  Simo  had  warned 
them  that  if  water  should  ever  touch  him,  it  would  act  like  fire,  that  is,  first 
weaken,  and  then  destroy  him.'  As  a  matter  of  fact,  none  of  the  three  women  had 
ever  seen  him  bathe:  whenever  he  wanted  to  perform  his  ablutions,  he  would 
wash  himself  in  honey  just  as  the  little  bees  do.  Hia  wife  alone  was  well  aware 
of  this,  because  he  had  told  her  that  he  was  Simo-ahawara  when  they  had  first  met 
imder  the  shade  of  the  banab.  As  he  was  sitting  one  day  on  the  bank  with  the  baby 
in  his  arms,  while  the  three  women  were  washing  themselves,  the  two  sisters-in-law 
succeeded  in  dashing  water  over  him.  The  result  was  that  he  screamed  out,  "I 
bum!  I  bum!"  and  flying  away,  like  other  bees,  into  a  tree,  melted  into  honey,  and 
his  child  changed  into  Wau-uta,  the  Tree-frog  [Sects.  17,  18]. 

131A.  The  Man  who  was  Changed  into  a  Powis  (W) 

A  husband,  his  wife,  and  her  two  brothers  lived  together  in  a  house.  One  day, 
when  the  sky  was  overclouded,  and  they  all  heard  the  noise  of  the  approaching  rain, 
the  husband  turned  to  his  wife  and  told  her  that  the  rain  always  made  him  sleep  soundly. 
When  he  turned  into  his  hammock  that  night,  and  it  happened  to  rain,  the  good 
woman  accordingly  said  to  her  brothers,  ''I  must  tie  up  my  man  out  in  the  rain," 
and  they  helped  her  tie  him  up  and  carry  him  outside  into  the  rain  where  he  remained 
all  night.  Waking  up  at  early  dawn,  his  first  remark  was:  "I  have  had agood sleep. 
You  may  loose  me."  And  they  loosened  him.  Now  although  he  was  in  a  great 
passion,  he  did  not  show  it,  but  he  determined  to  punish  his  wife.  He  bade  her  get 
ready  to  accompany  him,  as  he  proposed  going  a-hunting,  and  when  they  reached  a 
suitable  spot  far  out  in  the  bush,  he  told  her  to  make  a  babracote  and  get  firewood, 
because  he  intended  killing  the  alligator  which  frequented  the  neighboring  water- 
hole.  But  he  was  only  fooling  her  with  the  alligator  yam,  because  as  soon  as  she 
had  completed  everything,  he  killed  her,  and  removing  the  head,  cut  up  the  rest  of 
her  body  and  put  it  on  the  babracote  to  dry.  When  the  flesh  was  cured,  he  packed 
it  in  a  waiyarri,  which  he  had  plaited  in  the  meantime,  and  carried  it  toward  his 
house,  leaving  it,  as  is  usual,  at  some  distance  from  the  dwelling.  Upon  the  top  of  a 
stick  fixed  in  the  ground  over  the  waiyarri  he  attached  his  poor  wife's  head  in  such 
a  way  that  her  face  looked  in  the  direction  of  her  late  home.  The  face  carried  a  silver 
nose-ornament.  He  took  back  with  him  only  her  dried  liver,  and  his  brothers-in-law 
welcomed  him  when  they  saw  the  meat.  He  then  gave  them  to  eat  of  the  liver,  and 
they  ate  it.  At  last  he  said,  "You  must  go  help  your  sister;  she  is  weary  of  carrying 
such  a  load  of  meat."  They  accordingly  proceeded  down  the  path,  and  it  was  not 
long  before  they  saw  the  head  staring  at  them  from  above  the  waiyarri;  they  recog- 
nized it  as  their  sister's  and  rushed  home.  In  the  meantime  the  husband  had  left 
the  house  in  another  direction,  saying  that  he  was  going  to  bathe  at  the  waterside; 
but  he  was  again  fooUng,  for  on  reaching  the  river-bank,  he  shoved  all  the  corials 

■  Quite  recently  a  woman  complained  about  having  been  turned  off  a  certain  mission-station,  for  the 
sole  reason  discoverable  by  me  that  she  wanted  to  live  with  her  deceased  sister's  husband.  On  the  other 
hand,  when  the  missionary  joins  certain  cousins  in  wedlock,  the  old  Indians  regard  this  as  bestial  and 
incestuous:  it  is  a  matter  of  blood-relationship.— W.  E.  R. 

'  During  the  promiscuous  bathing  indulged  in  by  the  untutored  Indians,  the  tact  o(  a  woman  doing  this 
to  a  member  of  the  opposite  sex  is  tantamount  to  solicitation. 

'  The  idea  intended  to  be  conveyed  here  is  that  just  in  the  same  way  that  water  mi.ve  J  with  honey  weakens 
and  spoils  it,  so  fire  melts  and  destroys  the  wax.  As  already  mentioned,  Simo  belonged  to  the  great  Bee 
Nation,  whose  members  are  not  made  of  flesh  and  bone,  but  of  honey  and  wax. 


202  ANIMISM   AND   POLK-LOBB   OF   GUIANA   INDIANS    [kth.  ANN.  30 

from  their  moorings,  and  getting  into  one,  made  his  way  down  the  stream.  The 
murdered  woman's  brothers  had  got  home  by  now,  and  telling  their  old  mother 
what  they  had  seen,  asked  her  what  had  become  of  the  culprit.  As  soon  as  they 
learned  that  he  had  gone  to  bathe,  they  hastened  down  to  the  landing,  and  finding 
no  coiial  there,  one  of  them  swam  across  the  stream  to  get  one,  and  both  getting  in, 
they  gave  chase.  They  pulled  hard  and  soon  caught  up  with  their  man,  but  as  they 
drew  near,  he  jumped  on  shore  and  climbed  a  tree,  shouting,  "Your  little  sister  is 
there  where  I  left  her."  They  tried  to  strike  him,  but  he  was  now  changed  into  a 
Yakahatata,  a  sort  of  powis  which  thus  is  always  crj'ing  out "  Sister-little-there  "  [that  is, 
ija-ko-i  sanuka  tataha,  of  which  Yakahatata  is  the  nearest  approach  in  bird-language 
to  which  he  can  attain]. 

133.  The  Stolen  Child  (W) 

A  man  went  out  hunting,  leaving  at  home  his  wife  and  little  baby  girl,  a  child 
that  was  just  beginning  to  walk.  Night  was  falling  and  the  mother  was  preparing 
food  for  her  husband's  return.  While  thus  occupied  the  child  started  crying,  and 
just  at  that  moment  the  old  grandmother  came  from  over  the  way  to  fetch  it.  The 
mother  was  only  too  pleased  to  be  temporarily  relieved  of  her  responsibilities,  and 
when  the  old  woman  asked  her  to  hand  the  child  over,  she  willingly  did  so,  and  was 
thus  enabled  to  get  all  the  cooking  done  without  further  interruption.  When  this 
was  completed,  she  went  to  fetch  her  baby,  and  said,  "Give  me  my  child."  But 
when  the  old  woman  said,  "What  child?  I  know  nothing  about  any  child,"  the 
poor  mother  knew  that  she  had  been  tricked.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  it  was  really  a 
Tiger  who  had  assumed  the  exact  form  of  the  old  woman,  and  so  had  deceived  the 
mother.  When  the  hiisband  at  last  returned,  the  distracted  woman  told  him  what 
had  happened,  and  they  both  started  out  to  search,  but  found  nothing.  Next  morn- 
ing they  renewed  their  search,  but  were  again  unsuccessful,  and  at  last  gave  up  their 
quest.  Thus  they  gradually  lost  touch  with  their  little  daughter,  and  after  a  time 
she  was  foigotten.  A  few  years  passed,,  and  the  parents  began  to  lose  things  about 
the  house.  First  of  all,  the  beads  on  their  necklaces  disappeared  one  night;  on 
another  occasion  their  cotton  garters  could  not  be  found;  one  evening  all  the  ite 
[MauTilid\  starch  vanished;  one  morning  the  wood-skin  [i.  e.  bark]  apron-belt  was 
nowhere  to  be  seen;  not  long  afterward  the  buck-pots  began  to  disappeax  one  after 
the  other;  and  so  things  continued  unaccountably  to  be  lost.  Though  the  parents 
had  not  the  slightest  idea  that  such  was  the  case,  it  was  the  Tiger  who  came  every 
now  and  then  after  nightfall  to  steal  all  these  things  for  the  little  girl  to  use.  She 
was  getting  of  course  to  be  a  young  maiden  now,  and  Tiger  was  minding  her  as  his 
own  kith  and  kin.  The  young  maiden  soon  became  a  woman,  nourished  with  all 
the  meat  that  Tiger  provided.  [Quandocumque  menstruavit  sanguinem  lambavit.] 
He  was  stLLl  a  tiger  and,  continuing  to  do  what  tigers  and  dogs  do  [incepit  femmam 
olfacere].  Moreover,  his  two  brothers,  being  similarly  affected,  followed  his  example. 
The  girl  felt  very  strange  at  these  periods  and  could  not  understand  the  actions  toward 
her  of  Tiger  and  his  two  brothers.  So  she  made  up  her  mind  to  escape,  and  asked  Tiger 
one  day  how  far  their  place  was  from  the  spot  where  her  parents  lived .  He  was 
somewhat  suspicious  and  wanted  to  know  first  of  aU  why  she  asked  the  question. 
So  she  told  him  something  like  this:  "You  are  an  old  man  and  will  die  soon.  I  am 
young.  What  wiU  then  happen  to  me?  If  I  knew  where  they  were,  I  could  then 
go  to  my  parents.''  Recognizing  the  force  of  her  argument,  he  told  her  that  they 
lived  in  such  and  such  a  direction,  that  it  was  not  far,  and  that  immediately  upon 
his  decease  she  must  hurry  to  them,  lest  his  two  brothers  should  meet  her  and  tear 
her  up.  Contented  for  the  present  with  this  information,  the  woman  bided  her 
time  to  seize  a  favorable  opportunity  of  escape — an  opportunity  which  was  not  long 
in  coming.    She  planned  what  to  do,  she  was  getting  tired  of  always  being  alone 


»OTH]  THE   SPIBITS   OF   THE   BUSH  203 

in  the  depths  of  the  forest .  So,  taking  the  biggest  of  the  buck-pots,  she  put  all  kinds  of 
food  into  it,  and  placed  it  on  the  fire.  When  the  contents  were  boiled,  she  went  to 
take  it  off,  but  pretended  she  could  not  stand  the  heat,  and  turning  to  Tiger,  said, 
"No!  it  is  too  heavy.  I  want  you  to  help  me."  So  without  more  ado,  Tiger  stooped 
down,  put  his  paws  one  on  each  side  of  the  projecting  rim  of  the  pot,  and  so  lifted  it 
off  the  fire.  While  thus  occupied,  she  smartly  tapped  the  pot  from  below  up,  dashing 
the  boiling  contents  over  the  creature's  face,  a  procedure  which  made  hiTn  fall,  yell 
with  pain,  and  die.  His  two  brothers  heard  the  roaring  and  said,  "Oh!  the  old  man 
must  be  sporting  with  his  girl " ;  but  this  was  not  the  case,  he  never  having  had  inti- 
mate relations  with  her.  In  the  meantime,  the  woman  went  to  the  place  where  she 
had  been  told  her  people  lived,  and  called  out:  "I  am  the  little  girl  that  waa  lost 
many  a  long  day  ago.  Where  are  my  parents?"  The  latter  showed  themselves 
and  said,  "You  are  our  daughter,"  and  would  have  liked  a  long  chat  over  what  had 
happened  during  her  absence,  but  the  woman  warned  them  that  there  was  no  time 
for  this,  that  they  must  all  escape  because  Tiger's  two  brothers  would  come  and 
kill  them  for  payment  [i.  e.  in  revenge].  So  they  loosened  their  hammock-ropea 
and  hurried  themselves  to  leave.  While  they  were  do.ing  so,  a  young  man,  a  cousin, 
eaid:  "Well!  I  can  not  leave  this  grindstone  here:  I  shall  want  it  for  sharpening."  ' 
So  saying,  he  placed  it  in  his  hammock,  folded  the  latter,  and,  in  the  hurry  of  the 
moment,  not  thinking  of  what  he  waa  doing,  slung  it  in  the  usual  manner  over  his 
shoulder.  The  imprepared-for  weight,  however,  broke  his  back  and  he  fell  down 
dead,  and  there  the  others  left  him.^ 

133.  The  Tiger  Changed  into  a  Woman  (A) 

There  was  a  man  justly  noted  for  his  skill  in  hunting  bush-hog.  Though  his  friends 
might  be  more  than  a  match  for  him  in  hunting  other  game,  with  bush-hog  he  had 
hardly  an  equal,  certainly  no  superior.  He  would  always  succeed  in  killing  five  or  six, 
when  the  Tiger  who  invariably  followed  on  the  heels  of  the  pack  would  catch  only 
one  or  two.  The  Tiger  could  not  help  noticing  his  success,  and  on  the  next  occasion 
that  our  friend  went  into  the  bush  changed  himself  into  a  woman,  and  spoke  to  him. 
She  asked  him  how  he  managed  to  kill  so  many  bush-hog,  but  all  he  could  tell  her 
was  that  he  had  been  trained  to  it  ever  since  the  days  of  his  early  boyhood.  She 
next  expressed  her  desire  to  have  him  for  a  husband,  but  he,  knowing  her  origin, 
was  not  too  anxious  to  give  a  decided  answer.  She  overcame  his  scruples,  however, 
by  convincing  him  that  if  they  lived  together,  they  could  kill  ever  so  many  more 
bush-hog  than  it  was  possible  to  do  singly.  And  then  he  agreed.  He  lived  with 
her  for  a  long,  long  time,  and  she  turned  out  to  be  an  exceedingly  good  wife,  for  besides 
looking  after  the  cooking  and  the  barbecuing,  she  made  an  excellent  huntress.  One 
day  she  asked  him  whether  he  had  father  or  mother,  and  learning  that  his  parents 
and  other  relatives  were  still  aUve,  inquired  whether  he  would  not  like  to  pay  them 
a  visit,  because  she  felt  sure  that  from  not  having  seen  him  for  so  long  the  old  people 
would  think  him  dead.  And  when  he  said,  "AU  right!  I  would  like  to  go  home," 
she  offered  to  show  him  the  road  and  to  accompany  him,  but  only  on  the  condition 
that  he  never  told  his  folk  from  what  nation  she  was  sprung.  Before  they  started, 
she  said  they  must  go  hunting  for  a  few  days,  so  as  to  be  able  to  take  plenty  of  bush-hog 
with  them.  This  they  did,  finally  arriving  at  the  house  of  his  parents,  who  were 
indeed  glad  to  welcome  him  after  so  many  years.  The  first  question  his  old  mother 
asked  him  was,  "Where  did  you  get  that  beautiful  woman?"    He  told  her  that  he  had 

1  The  grindstone  referred  to  here  is  a  large  chunk  oJ  sandstone,  wliich  is  brought  into  the  Pomeroon 
District  bom  the  Waini  by  way  of  trade  and  barter. 

'  When,  through  the  interpreter,  I  pointed  out  to  the  old  woman  who  told  me  the  story  that  the  ending 
was  somewhat  unsatisfactory,  she  reminded  me  that  when  Tiger's  two  brothers  came  to  the  house,  they 
found  only  the  corpse  there.  Hence  there  was  no  one  left  to  tell  her  what  actually  did  transpire  subse- 
quently.— W.  E.  R. 


204  ANIMISM  AND  POLK-LOEE  OF  GUIANA  INDIANS   [bth.  ann.  30 

found  her  when  out  hunting  one  day  in  the  bush,  at  the  same  time  taking  care  to  omit 
all  mention  of  the  fact  that  she  was  really  a  Tiger.  While  at  his  old  home,  the  couple 
went  out  hunting  again  and  again,  invariably  returning  with  an  extraordinarily  large 
bag.  This,  unfortunately,  proved  to  be  their  undoing.  All  his  friends  and,  family 
became  suspicious  of  his  luck,  and  made  up  their  minds  to  discover  to  what  nation 
his  beautiful  wife  belonged.  He  was  often  asked,  but  always  refused  to  divulge  the 
secret.  His  mother,  however,  became  so  worried  and  upset  that  he  at  last  did  make 
a  clean  breast  of  it  to  her,  strictly  warning  her  not  to  tell  anyone  else,  as  his  wife  might 
leave  him  altogether.  And  now  trouble  soon  came.  One  day  the  husband's  people 
made  plenty  of  cassiri,  to  get  the  old  woman  drunk,  but  when  asked  about  her  daughter- 
in-law  she  wouldn't  tell:  they  gave  her  more  drink  and  still  she  held  her  tongue:  at 
last  they  gave  her  so  much  drink,  that  out  came  the  secret  and  all  the  friends  now  knew 
that  the  beautiful'  creature  whom  they  had  so  envied  was  after  all  only  a  Tiger.  The 
woman,  however,  who  had  heard  her  mother-in-law  exposing  her  origin,  felt  so  ashamed 
that  she  fled  into  the  bush  growling,  and  that  was  the  last  that  was  ever  seen  or  heard 
of  her.  Her  husband,  of  course,  upbraided  his  mother  roundly  for  betraying  him, 
but  she  said  she  really  could  not  help  herself;  they  had  made  her  so  drunk.  And 
the  poor  husband  would  often  go  into  the  bush  and  call  his  wife,  but  there  never, 
never  came  a  reply. 

134.  The  Woman  in  Love  with  a  Sloth  (A) 

A  woman  had  a  sloth  [Cholopus  didactylus]  for  a  sweetheart.  Every  time  that  she 
went  into  the  field  or  into  the  bush  she  used  to  carry  food  and  drink  for  him.  She 
would  call  Haul  Ha,u!  and  the  Sloth  would  clamber  down  the  tree:  and  they  caressed 
each  other  just  like  lovers.  Other  people  began  to  talk,  and  wondered  what  she  did 
with  the  food  and  drink  that  she  was  continually  taking  out  of  the  house.  Among 
these  was  a  young  man  who  watched  her  next  day,  and  saw  her  call  her  Sloth  lover 
and  caress  him.  But  instead  of  reciprocating  her  caresses,  the  Sloth  scratched  her, 
and  pulled  down  her  hair,  conduct  which  made  her  remark,  "Are  you  jealous  of  me, 
or  vexed?"  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  Sloth  was  very  much  vexed  as  well  as  jealous, 
because  he  could  see  the  young  man  watching  all  their  movements  from  behind  a  tree. 
The  woman  did  not  know  this,  and  turned  her  steps  homeward.  As  soon  as  she  was 
gone,  the  man  came  from  where  he  was  hiding,  and  killed  the  Sloth.  And  when  the 
woman  returned  next  day,  and  saw  the  animal  lying  dead,  she  fell  into  a  great  grief 
and  wept  bitter  tears,  saying,  "What  has  killed  you,  my  sweetheart?  "  But  the  young 
man,  who  had  been  following  her,  came  up  close  behind,  and  consoled  her.  "Don't 
be  so  foolish,"  he  remarked.  "A  fast  fellow  is  preferable  to  a  slow  Sloth.  Take  me 
for  a  sweetheart."    And  she  did.' 

135.  Why  Honey  is  so  Scarce  Now  (A) 

In  the  olden  times  bees'  nests  and  honey  were  very  plentiful  in  the  bush,  and  there 
was  one  man  in  particular  who  earned  quite  a  reputation  for  discovering  their  where- 
abouts. He  would  find  a  nest  where  no  one  else  could.  One  day,  while  chopping 
into  a  hollow  tree  where  he  had  located  some  honey,  he  suddenly  heard  a  voice  from 
the  inside  calling,  "Take  care!  You  are  cutting  me."  On  opening  the  tree  very 
carefully,  he  discovered  a  beautiful  woman,  who  told  him  she  was  Maba  [lit.  'honey'], 
the  Honey-Mother,  that  is,  the  Spirit  of  the  Honey.  As  she  was  quite  nude,  he  collected 
some  cotton,  which  she  made  into  a  cloth,  and  he  asked  her  to  be  his  wife.     She  con- 

1 1  happen  to  know  a  woman  who  has  a  child  with  a  flexed,  deformed  hand,  with  regard  to  which 
scandal  gives  the  explanation  on  somewhat  the  above  lines.  The  mother,  however,  accounts  for  the 
deformity  in  a  certainly  more  rational  way  by  the  statement  that,  during  her  pregnancy,  she  was  frightened 
one  day  on  suddenly  coming  across  a  sloth  lying  in  the  foot-path.— W.  E.  R. 


BOTH]  THE   SPIKITS   OF    THE   BUSH  205 

sented  on  condition  that  he  never  mention  her  name,  and  they  lived  very  happily 
together  for  many  years.  And  just  in  the  same  way  that  he  became  imiversaUy 
acknowledged  as  the  best  man  for  finding  bees'  nests,  so  she  made  a  name  for  herself 
in  the  way  of  brewing  excellent  cassiri  and  paiwarri.  She  had  to  make  only  one 
jugful,  and  it  would  prove  quite  suflBcient,  no  matter  the  number  of  visitors;  more 
than  this,  the  one  jugful  would  make  them  all  drunk.  She  thus  proved  herself  to  be 
a  splendid  wife.  One  day,  however,  when  the  drink  was  finished,  he  went. round  as 
house-master,  in  the  usual  manner,  to  his  many  guests  and  expressed  regret  that  even 
the  last  dregs  of  the  liquor  had  been  now  drained.  He  promised  them,  however,  that 
the  next  time  they  came,  there  would  be  provided  by  Maba — yes,  he  made  a  mistake 
and  thus  spoke  of  Ms  wife.  And  no  sooner  had  be  mentioned  the  name,  than  she 
flew  away  to  her  bees'  nest.  He  put  up  his  hands  to  stop  her,  but  she  was  already 
flown.  And  with  her,  his  luck  flew,  and  since  that  time  honey  has  always  been  more 
or  less  scarce.' 

136.  The  Man  who  Claimed  the  Tiger's  Meal  (C) 

One  day  an  Indian  "went  out  hunting  and  came  across  a  freshly-killed  Maipuri.  He 
could  see  that  a  Tiger  must  have  slaughtered  it  only  the  night  before,  but  as  he  was 
greedy  he  intended  claiming  the  meat  for  himself.  With  this  object  in  view,  he 
turned  back  to  fetch  his  wife  in  order  to  lend  assistance  in  smoke-drying  it.  Now, 
when  his  wife  saw  the  carcass,  she  knew  at  once  by  the  signs  on  it  that  her  husband 
had  never  killed  the  beast  and  had  no  right  to  it,  but  of  course  did  not  tell  him  so: 
she  realized  the  token  that  something  unusual  was  about  to  happen,  and  took  measures 
accordingly.  Hence,  when  her  husband  had  cut  up  the  meat,  she  built  two  babra^ 
cotes,  one  close  to  the  ground,  and  another  high  up  on  top.*  The  husband,  having 
completed  his  share  of  the  business,  tied  his  hammock  near  the  fire,  turned  in,  and 
soon  fell  fast  asleep.  The  wife,  however,  went  on  drying  the  flesh,  and  continued 
doing  so  until  late  into  the  night,  when  she  heard  a  tiger  growling  in  the  distance. 
She  immediately  called  out,  "Tiger!  Tigerl"  and  shook  the  man's  hammock,  but  he 
would  not  wake.  She  then  threw  a  calabashful  of  water  over  him,  but  this  did  not 
rouse  him,  so  she  took  a  blazing  fire-stick  and  placed  it  close  beneath  him,  but  even 
that  did  not  make  him  stir.  By  this  time  Tiger  was  close  at  hand,  so  climbing  up 
on  the  top  babracote  she  sat  there  very  quiet.  With  the  light  of  the  fire,  she 
saw  the  brute  jump  upon  her  husband,  kill  him,  and  eat  one  arm.  The  next  night  it 
came  again  and  ate  the  other  arm  and  a  leg:  and  so  for  four  nights  it  came,  until  there 
was  "no  more  man."  The  poor  woman  had  to  remain  all  this  time  up  on  the  babra- 
cote, but  she  knew  why  her  husband  had  been  punished. 

136A.  The  Woman  who  Battled  with  Two  Tigers  (W)' 

A  man,  having  tired  of  his  old  wife,  went  off  to  another  settlement  to  fetch  a  young 
one,  and  brought  her  home  with  him.  But  the  two  women  could  not  agree,  and  the 
new  one  was  always  getting  worsted,  so  much  so,  that  the  husband,  finally  obliged 
to  take  pity  on  her,  was  forced  to  send  her  to  the  home  from  which  he  had  taken  her. 
In  order  that  she  should  have  protection  on  the  road,  he  gave  her  a  large  sharp  knife. 
Starting  in  the  early  morning,  the  road  led  her  along  the  bush,  and  she  traveled  on 
until  night  overtook  her,  when  she  selected  a  young  ite  palm  up  which  she  climbed. 
But  before  climbing  she  cut  down  a  lot  of  "pimpler"  palms  [Bax^tris  sp.],  which  she 

1 1  am  afraid  my  readers  will  be  weary  ad  nauseam  of  the  repetition,  in  these  legends,  of  cases  in  which  the 
tongue  gets  loosened  under  the  influence  of  drink.  When,  however,  one  realizes  that  these  bacchanaUan 
orgies  constitute  an  integral  part  of  the  Indian  social  life,  it  will  be  no  matter  for  surprise  that  the  old 
adage,  In  vino  Veritas,  so  often  finds  application  here.— W.  E.  R. 

"  Among  all  these  Indians  the  making  of  the  babracote  is  woman's  work. 

•  For  another  Warrau  version  of  this  story  see  Sect.  300. 


206  ANIMISM  AND  POLK-LORB  OF  GUIANA  INDIANS   [bth.  ann.  30 

stacked  all  round  the  base  of  the  truni,  so  as  to  prevent  anyone  following  her.    Well, 
she  got  up  the  tree,  which  had  six  bunches  of  fruit  hanging  from  it,  and  nicEed  the 
stalks  of  every  bunch,  so  that  with  the  least  knock  or  cut  they  would  break  off  and  fall: 
this  done,  she  coiled  herself  up  in  the  young  palm-shoot,  and  fell  asleep.     She  slept 
until  about  midnight,  when  she  heard  the  roaring  of  a  Tiger  who,  scenting  her  from' a 
distance,  rushed  up  to  the  very  palm  on  which  she  was  resting.    Jumping  on  the 
trunk  above  the  "pimplers,"  he  crawled  up  it,  and  thence  onto  one  of  the  fruit 
bunches.    No  sooner  had  he  done  so  than  the  young  woman  above  made  a  cut  at  the 
"nick,"  with  the  result  that  down  went  both  Tiger  and  frviit.'    The  Tiger  had  another 
chance  and  jumped  on  another  bunch,  but  with  the  same  result.    He  made  a  third 
attempt,  and  on  this  occasion  fell  down  on  the  pimplers,  upon  which  he  was  impaled, 
what  with  the  weight  of  the  bunch  of  fruit  on  top  of  him.    Everything  was  soon  quiet, 
and  early  next  morning  when  the  young  woman  looked  to  see  what  had  happened, 
she  saw  the  Tiger  stretched  out  below.    Now  she  suspected  that  Tiger  might  be  only 
shamming,  and  so  she  was  afraid  to  come  down  at  first,  but  when  she  saw  his  tongue 
hanging  out,  she  knew  that  everything  was  all  right  and  that  he  was  really  dead. 
She  therefore  came  down  and  resumed  her  journey.    After  a  time  she  heard  the  sounds 
of  a  tree  being  cut,  and  then  made  to  fall;   thinking  that  it  was  her  people  felling 
trees,  she  hurried  on  in  the  direction  indicated.    But  what  was  her  surprise  to  see 
another  Tiger  playing  an  old  trick  of  his,  to  make  the  traveler  believe  that  timber 
was  being  cut  in  the  near  distance.    This  trick  consisted  of  his  hanging  from  the 
branch  with  his  front  paws  and  whipping  the  trunk  with  his  tail,  so  as  to  imitate  the 
sound  of  the  ax  chopping.    To  pretend  that  the  cut  trunk  was  then  fallen,  he  would 
next  pull  a  big  bunch  of  twigs  and  leaves  and  throw  them  with  full  force  on  the  ground 
below.    Now,  fortunately  for  the  young  woman,  she  came  upon  this  Tiger  from  behind, 
just  as  he  was  hanging  from  the  branch,  and  without  more  ado  said  to  herself:  "Well, 
dead  or  alive,  this  is  my  only  chance.     I  must  cut  off  his  tail."    Suiting  the  action 
to  the  word,  she  crept  forward  very  cautiously,  and  with  one  swish  of  the  knife  cut 
off  the  creature's  tail.    Tiger  was  so  ashamed  at  his  own  appearance  now,  that  he 
went  off  howling  with  rage  and  pain,  afraid  of  anyone  seeing  him,  and  thus  left  the 
woman  free  to  resume  her  journey.    She  again  heard  the  sound  of  timber  being 
cut,  but  on  this  occasion  made  sure  before  getting  too  close  that  the  sound  proceeded 
from  people  and  not  from  Tigers.    To  her  great  joy  it  was  her  own  people.    They  were 
all  glad  to  see  her,  but  asked  how  she  had  managed  to  get  through  that  long  stretch 
of  bush  in  safety.    She  proceeded  to  tell  them  that  she  had  killed  one  Tiger  outright, 
that  she  had  cut  ofi  the  tail  from  another,  that — ^but  her  brothers  stopped  her  before 
she  could  get  any  further:  "No  woman  can  do  that,"  they  interrupted.    So  she  took 
both  of  them  back  on  the  road  and  showed  them  the  severed  tail^  and  farther  back, 
the  Tiger's  carcass.    They  would  not  approach  too  close  to  the  latter,  fearing  that  it 
might  still  be  alive,  but  at  any  rate  they  now  believed  what  their  sister  had  told  them. 

137.  The  Man  with  a  Vulttoie  Wife  (W)^ 

There  were  once  three  brothers.  The  middle  one  was  a  very  good  hunter,  and 
this  story  is  all  about  him  and  his  bird  wife.  While  out  in  the  bush  one  day  he  came 
across  a  large  house  wherein  people  were  ''sporting".  These  people  were  very  fair, 
much  like  white  persons,  a  thing  not  to  be  wondered  at,  because  they  were  really 
Vultures  {Sarcorham.phus  papa]  who  had  taken  off  their  feathers  just  for  the  occasion, 
to  hang  about  the  place  and  decorate  it.  They  were  dancing  and  singing  the  makiian 
tune  [Sect.  75]  on  all  sorts  of  musical  instruments,  from  the  harri-harri  flute  to  the 

1  This  part  of  the  story  will  be  understood  by  remembering  that  in  this  Mamitia  pahn  the  bunches  of 
fruit  form  around  the  top  of  the  trunk  a  more  or  less  circular  obstacle  to  anything  passing  to  the  foliage 
above. 

s  This  story  bears  somewhat  close  comparison  with  those  given  in  Sects.  Hi  and  SOS. 


BOTH]  THE   SPIRITS   OF   THE   BUSH  207 

rattle.  The  whole  place  looked  very  pretty  because  it  was  decorated  with  their  red 
necklaces,  white  dresses,  and  black  wing-tips.'  All  around,  hung  up  by  cords  to 
the  beams,  were  the  dau-u  hewire;  these  were  long  pieces  of  wood,  shaped  somewhat 
like  yotir  [i.  e.  European]  "indian-clubs,"  bigger  below  than  above,  all  beautifully 
painted  and  tasseled.^  Our  friend  stood  there  watching  and  continued  watching: 
so  enchanted  was  he  with  the  sight  that,  before  he  was  aware,  darkness  fell,  which 
compelled  him  to  remain  there  all  night.  His  mother  was  wondering  what  had 
become  of  him,  and  was  still  more  surprised  to  see  him  return  empty-handed  next 
morning.  He  straightway  went  into  his  hammock,  without  saying  a  word:  his  mind 
was  too  full  of  what  he  had  seen.  By  and  by,  he  took  up  his  harri-harri  and  began 
to  play  on  it,  but  he  told  no  one  of  his  adventures  or  why  he  had  not  brought  back 
home  any  game.  Next  day  he  quietly  slipped  away  before  dawn,  and  wended  his 
way  to  the  beautiful  house  he  had  gazed  upon  two  nights  before.  It  was  still  there 
and  so  were  all  the  people,  hosts  and  guests — fair  people  as  I  have  said — all  singing 
and  dancing.  The  girls  looked  so  pretty  that  he  set  his  mind  on  getting  one  of  them. 
Now  there  was  "lemon-grass"  about  a  yard  high  growing  thick  all  around  the  house, 
and  at  a  little  distance  from  it  and  under  cover  of  this  he  gradually  crept  closer  and 
closer,  on  all  fours,  up  to  just  about  the  spot  where  the  girls  during  the  progress  of 
their  mari-mari  dance  would  retreat  backward  in  their  steps.'  As  they  thus  made  a 
move  a  little  farther  back  than  usual,  he  caught  hold  of  the  girl  he  had  taken  a  fancy 
to,  but  no  sooner  had  he  seized  her  than  all  the  otherpeople,  house,  decorations,  and 
music  suddenly  disappeared,  and  everything  became  the  same  old  humdrum  trees 
and  bushes  again.  He  had  the  girl,  however,  and  although  she  struggled  bravely, 
he  never  relaxed  his  hold.  Exhausted  in  her  efforts  to  secure  her  freedom,  at  last 
she  panted,  "Loose  me!  Loose  me!  I  want  to  go  home,"  but  this  appeal  was  of 
no  avail,  for  the  only  reply  she  got  was:  "No!  I  want  you  for  my  wife.  If  you  will 
only  behave  and  not  refuse  me,  you  shall  have  everything  you  like."  She  yielded 
and  she  followed  him,  only  insisting  on  the  stipulation  that  he  must  not  thrash  her. 
He  promised  her  that  he  never  would  do  that,  and  thus  he  brought  his  bride  home. 
They  lived  together  a  long  time  contentedly,  he  always  giving  way  to  her  insistence 
of  never  using  the  meat  on  the  same  day  that  he  brought  it  home  from  the  chase:  she 
would  never  eat  it  fresh,  preferring  to  keep  it  a  day  or  two  until  it  became  tainted.* 
Now,  one  day  it  happened  that  her  husband  returned  from  the  hunt  extremely 
hungry,  and  he  told  her  that  she  must  cook  at  once  the  game  that  he  had  brought 
her,  and  that  he  would  not  wait  for  it  until  the  morrow.  She  refused  point-blank, 
and  forgetting  his  pronyse,  he  gave  her  a  thrashing.  Another  time  the  same  thing 
happened,  he  wanting  the  meat  cooked  immediately,  but  she  objecting:  he  thrashed 
her  again.  And  he  beat  her  a  third  time.  She  bore  this  brutal  treatment  meekly 
and  never  upbraided  him.  She  merely  told  him  that  she  proposed  taking  him  to 
see  her  father.'  So  he  went  a-hunting,  and  brought  back  much  meat  as  a  present 
for  her  family,  and  when  ready  to  start  she  gave  him  Vulture  feathers  for  a  covering; 
he  could  not  visit  her  people  without  this  garb.    After  they  had  traveled  a  good 

iThese  birds  have  a  feather-coloring  somewhat  as  here  mentioned. 

•  I  have  failed  thus  far  to  learn  the  use  or  meaning  of  these  obsolete  ornaments,  if  ornaments  indeed 
they  were:  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  the  possibiUtyof  them  having  been  the  dummy-figures  of  enemies 
slain  in  battle,  as  we  know,  from  historical  evidence,  it  was  the  custom  in  old-time  Carib  houses  to  keep 
such  figures.— W.  E.  E. 

8  In  the  mari-mari  dance,  the  name  applied  to  it  by  Caribs  and  Warraus,  a  row  of  women  linked  together 
by  their  arms  round  waist  and  shoulder  faces  a  similar  row  of  men.  In  the  course  of  the  numerous  evolu- 
tions each  side  advances  and  retires  with  a  rhythmic  stamping  movement.  The  idea  intended  to  he  con- 
veyed in  the  story  is  that  as  the  women  retreated  from  the  row  of  men,  with  their  backs  toward  him,  the 
visitor  ran  but  very  little  risk  of  being  seen  by  them,  and  yet  gained  a  position  of  advantage  for  carrying 
out  his  designs,  as  will  be  immediately  seen. 

»  Though  in  human  form,  she  still  had  the  attributes  and  tastes  of  the  Vulture. 

» The  only  people  that  a  married  Indian  woman  can  lawfully  seek  redress  from,  a  procedure  but  very 
rarely  followed,  however,  are  her  father  and  brothers. 


208  ANIMISM   AND   FOLK-LOEE   OP   GUIANA  INDIANS    [ets.  ANN.  30 

distance  into  the  bush,  they  came  to  land  that  was  "like  steps,"  so  that  the  farther 
they  went  the  higher  they  got,  until  at  last  they  reached  a  very  high  spot — ^the  very 
spot  indeed  where  the  carrion-crow  governors  [i.  e.  the  Vultures]  lived.'  "You 
must  not  be  afraid  of  saying  good-day  to  my  father,"  she  was  careful  enough  to 
admonish  him,  "although  he  is  a  very  celebrated  inan."  When  therefore  the  couple 
reacher  her  father's  place,  he  went  up  and  shook  the  old  man's  hand.^  His  father- 
in-law  bade  him  sit  down,  and  after  the  usual  routine  of  questions  had  been  asked 
and  answered,  told  him:  "All  right.  You  can  stay  with  me  today  and  return 
tomorrow.  I  will  come  and  pay  you  a  visit  later  on  or  I  will  send  some  of  my  people 
to  call  on  you."  The  old  man  was  well  informed  as  to  how  badly  he  had  been  treat- 
ing his  daughter,  and  felt  too  little  affection  to  warrant  his  asking  him  to  prolong  his 
stay.  He  knew  also  that  the  time  would  not  be  far  distant  when  he  would  have  to 
inflict  summary  chastisement.  Thus  it  was  that  the  couple  returned  next  day  to 
the  mundane  home  of  the  husband,  who  felt  sore  at  the  treatment  he  had  received 
from  his  father-in-law.  Man-like,  he  vented  his  spleen  on  his  unfortunate  wife, 
whom  he  thrashed  twice.  So  badly  did  he  knock  her  about  that  even  his  mother 
took  her  part.  Addressing  her  son,  the  mother  said,  "You  are  doing  wrong,  in  beat- 
ing the  girl,  especially  since  she  is  so  far  away  from  all  her  family.'  I  am  sure  some 
evil  will  happen  if  you  continue  such  conduct."  The  dame  was  a  wise  old  woman, 
because  her  motherly  instincts  told  her  that  her  daughter-in-law  was  not  "a  real 
person,"  but  had  something  weird  and  eerie  about  her.  Did  not  the  girl  wear  a 
strange  nose-ornament  for  instance?*  Her  son,  however,  refused  "to  hear  "  and  com- 
menced beating  his  wife  again.'  On  this  occasion  however,  she  picked  up  the 
feather  covering — the  very  one  that  she  had  lent  him  when  they  went  to  visit  her 
father's  place — and  putting  it  on,  started  to  fly  homeward.  He  jumped  out  of  his 
hammock  and  tried  to  catch  her,  but  the  bird  was  already  flown.  As  day  after  day 
passed,  and  cheerless  night  closed  in,  he  became  more  and  more  wretched,  his  misery 
turning  at  last  into  heartfelt  sorrow:  yes,  truth  to  tell,  he  wept  now  because  he  was 
so  unhappy.  But  it  was  too  late;  the  mischief  had  been  done.  Every  day  he  went 
into  the  bush  where  the  beautiful  house  once  stood,  but  there  was  nothing  there: 
he  went  along  the  same  paths  they  used  to  tread  together,  and  cried  and  called  for 
her,  but  there  never  came  the  voice  that  he  once  upon  a  time  loved  so  well,  and 
now  longed  so  much  to  hear.  And  where  was  she?  She  too  was  weeping,  but  for  a 
very  different  reason:  pain  and  anguish,  not  selfishness,  were  the  cause  of  her  tears. 
Her  old  father  comforted  her,  saying:  "Do  not  cry.  I  told  your  husband  that  I 
would  come  and  visit  him,  or  else  my  people  would."  And  thus  it  came  to  pass  that 
he  sent  the  Carrion  Crows  [Cathartes  burrovianus]  to  visit  hiS  late  son-in-law.  These 
met  him  at  the  very  spot  where  once  stood  the  beautiful  house  whence  he  captured 
his  wife,  and  there,  in  that  very  spot,  they  killed  him.  They  went  and  told  the  old 
man  Vulture  what  they  had  done,  and  afterward  returned  to  devour  the  carcass.^ 

■  1  Upon  my  asking  tor  further  information  about  the  "steps,"  I  was  tola  that  this  structure  had  heen 

erected  by  the  birds  specially  to  admit  of  their  human  visitor  reaching  the  Vulture  country. W.  E.  E. 

2  When  I  expressed  doubt  as  to  the  practice  of  handshsiking  among  the  Guiana  Indians,  my  informant 
Insisted  that  it  certainly  constituted  the  Warrau  form  of  greeting.  Thus,  at  a  party,  or  on  other  occa- 
sions when  the  house-master  was  expecting  friends,  he  would  go  to  meet  his  guest  halfway  between 
the  water-side  and  the  house,  to  which,  taking  him  by  the  hand,  he  would  lead  him.  In  other  words 
the  salutation  was  rather  in  the  form  of  a  hand-lead  than  of  a  hand-shake. 

'  She  means  to  indicate  that  the  young  woman  has  nobody  near  to  look  after  and  protect  her  interests.- 

*  My  informant  is  firmly  convinced  that  when  vultures  assume  an  anthropomorphic  form  the  wattle- 
like growth  on  top  of  the  beak  becomes  a  sort  of  nose-ring. 

5  It  is  not  a  little  remarkable  that  all  my  English-speaking  Indian  friends  invariably  employ  this 
expression  "to  hear"  for  "to  heed."  I  have  noticed  and  recorded  the  same  peculiarity  among  the  Queens- 
land savages.  Compare  "He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear,"  used  as  a  preface  to  many  important 
statements  in  the  Christian  Scriptures.— W.  E.  R. 

» Creoles  as  weU  as  English-speaking  Indians  in  the  Pomeroon  and  elsewhere,  from  the  association  of 
these  two  species  of  birds,  speak  of  the  Vulture  as  the  Carrion-Crow  Governor  or  "Boss." 


BO'TH]  THE  SPIBITS  OF  THE  BUSH  209 

138.  The  Man  with  a  Baboon  Wife  (A) 

He  had  been  far  out  into  the  bush  in  search  of  game,  and  it  abnost  seemed  as  if 
he  were  to  find  no  use  for  his  bow  and  arrows.  I  am  talking  about  an  Arawak  hunter 
who  lived  a  long  while  ago.  Late  in  the  afternoon,  however,  he  shot  a  "baboon," 
as  you  Creoles  call  it  [MyceUs],  which  proved  to  be  a  female.  It  was  too  late  to  bring 
it  home,  so  he  built  himself  a  banab  with  a  view  to  making  himself  comfortable  for 
the  night.  This  done,  he  cut  off  the  animal's  tail,  roasted  and  ate  it,  putting  the 
remainder  of  the  carcass  on  the  babracote  to  get  smoke-dried  during  the  night.  Next 
morning  he  was  up  early,  entered  the  bush  again,  was  very  successful,  and  returned 
in  the  evening  laden  with  game.  As  he  approached  the  banab,  you  can  imagine  his 
surprise  on  seeing  a  woman  lying  in  his  hammock,  and  no  baboon  on  the  babracote. 
Not  understanding  whence  she  could  have  come,  he  asked  her  what  she  was  doing 
there,  and  she  told  him  that,  on  account  of  his  loneliness,  she  had  come  to  help  look 
after  the  meat  and  keep  him  company.  After  further  questioning,  she  assured  him 
that  there  was  no  baboon  on  the  babracote  when  she  had  arrived.  He  had  his  sus- 
picions as  to  her  origin  aroused  on  noticing  that  her  fingers  were  naturally  clenched, 
and  that  with  the  one  hand  she  was  continually  trying  to  keep  extended  the  fingers 
of  the  other.'  He  accordingly  asked  her  straight  whether  she  herself  was  not  the 
baboon  that  had  so  mysteriously  disappeared,  but  she  denied  it.  She  was  a  good- 
looking  wench,  however,  and  he  took  her  as  wife,  with  the  result  that  they  lived 
happily  together,  so  happily  that  they  kept  no  secrets  from  each  other.  One  day 
her  husband  asked  her  again  about  the  baboon,  and  what  had  become  of  it.  She  now 
admitted  that  she  was  the  baboon  transformed  into  her  present  shape,  but  that  he 
must  not  speak  about  it  to  anyone.  A  few  days  later  they  took  their  departure  from 
the  banab,  and  made  their  way  to  the  husband's  house,  bringing  plenty  of  game 
with  them.  And  here  they  lived  a  very  long  time — still  quite  happily  together. 
It  is  true  that  he  would  frequently  be  asked  by  his  relatives  as  to  what  tribe  his  wife 
belonged,  but  he  never  told  them.  One  morning  early,  hearing  the  baboons  "  calling," 
she  informed  her  husband  that  her  uncles  were  drinking  cassiri,  and  suggested  that 
they  should  both  go  and  join  the  party.  The  uncle  Baboon  was  howling  on  the  top- 
most branches  of  an  immense  cashew  tree,  the  trunk  of  which  was  so  big  that  it  allowed 
of  a  proper  foot-path  being  made  up  it.  The  couple  made  their  way  to  the  tree,  and 
followed  the  track.  Up  and  up  they  went,  until  they  found  themselves  in  the  real 
Baboon  country,  and  arrived  at  the  threshold  of  a  big  house.  And  what  a  lot  of  drink 
there  was!  And  so  many  Baboons  to  drink  it!  Everyone  got  drunk  and  then  each 
began  to  chatter,  the  one  asking  all  kinds  of  questions  from  the  other.  Our  friend 
was  again  asked  what  nation  his  wife  came  from  and,  being  now  in  his  cups,  let  out 
the  secret,  and  told  them  she  was  really  a  Baboon.  But  no  sooner  had  he  uttered 
the  forbidden  word,  than  everything — his  wife,  drinks,  house,  and  baboons — all 
suddenly  vanished,  and  he  found  himself  desolate  and  alone  on  the  top  of  the  cashew 
tree.  But  how  to  get  down  was  the  puzzle:  he  was  at  too  great  a  height  to  jump  to  the 
ground,  and  the  trunk  was  too  huge  for  him  to  encircle  and  scale.  He  knew  not  what 
to  do,  and  he  felt  very  miserable.  After  a  time  a  bunia  bird  came  along,  and  asked 
him  what  he  was  doing  all  alone  up  there.  And  when  the  bird  learned  how  the  poor 
fellow  had  lost  his  wife  just  for  having  said  that  she  belonged  to  the  Baboon  nation, 
he  offered  to  help  him  out  of  his  difficulties  and  get  him  safe  to  the  ground.  The  man 
was  perplexed,  and  asked  how  this  was  to  be  managed,  but  the  bird  told  him  to  follow 
the  same  procedure  as  he  (the  bird)  did  in  the  making  of  the  aerial  roots  of  the  kofa 
tree  [Sect.  168\.  Obeying  instructions,  the  hanging  vine-roots  soon  reached  the  earth, 
and  clinging  to  these,  the  man  got  down  in  safety.  So  far,  so  good;  but  even  yet  he 
did  not  know  exactly  where  he  was,  and  he  had  no  means  of  finding  in  which  direction 

'  When  a  monlcey  is  barbecued,  the  digits,  owing  to  muscular  contraction,  invariably  become  strongly 
flexed. 

15961  ° — 30  ETH— 15 14 


210  ANIMISM  AKD  FOLK-LORE  OF  GUIANA  INDIANS   [bth.ann.30 

his  house  lay.  A  little  hummingbird  commenced  flying  about,  and  then  settled  on 
a  neighboring  bush:  it  offered  to  show  the  man  home,  and  told  him  to  follow  its  flight. 
But  it  flew  far  too  swiftly,  and  the  man  could  not  keep  up  with  it:  so  it  came  back  and 
made  a  second  start,  this  time  following  the  course  of  a  straight  line  before  it  disap- 
peared. The  man  followed  the  line,  and  came  to  a  path,  where  the  bird  met  him 
again  and  said,  "  Follow  the  path."    The  man  did  so,  and  got  home. 

139.  The  Disobedient  Son  Killed  by  a  Tiger  (W) 

Two  boys  were  playing  around  the  house.  Their  father  became  vexed  at  seeing 
them  idling,  and  said,  "  It  would  be  much  better  if  you  went  huntibg  and  fishing  or 
did  something  useful  for  yourselves."  The  boys  got  angry  at  being  spoken  to  in  this 
manner  and  went  to  another  house  far  away  in  the  swamps.  They  were  obliged  to 
hunt  now,  whether  they  liked  it  or  not:  there  was  no  mother  to  bake  cassava,  no 
father  to  bring  them  meat.  They  used  to  eat  the  grubs  of  a  certain  beetle  [the  hi-bomo 
of  the  Warraus]  that  grows  in  the  ite  palm,  after,  killing  them  by  "nicking"  them 
against  the  trunk.  It  happened  that,  while  eating  one,  the.  elder  brother  heard  it 
whistle;  he  knew  this  to  be  the  sign  or  token  that  he  was  going  to  die.  When  they  got 
back  to  the  house,  and  were  resting  on  the  manicole  flooring — a  flooring  which  all 
our  houses  built  in  the  swamps  used  to  have — ^both  brothers  saw  a  Hebu  enter,  pick 
up  his  harri-harri,  and  saying,  "This  is  my  plaything,"  warm  himself  at  the  fire,  and 
then  go  out  again.  Both  brothers  knew  that  this  Spirit  had  come  from  some  grave, 
and  that  its  presence  was  another  sure  token  of  impending  doom.  After  the  Hebu 
had  left,,  a  tiger  came  along,  and  both  boys  clambered  into  the  roof.  "Poor  we 
tonight,"  exclaimed  the  elder;  "our  father  is  angered,  and  this  is  what  he  has  sent 
to  punish  us.  We  must  be  content,  even  if  we  are  killed. ' '  Tiger  made  a  few  springs, 
and  finally  succeeded  in  pulling  down  the  elder  brother;  he  dragged  the  dead  body 
into  the  bush,  where  it  was  devoured.  Returning  to  the  house.  Tiger  put  out  his 
tongue  to  lick  off  all  the  blood  oozing  from  his  mouth,  and  then  sought  the  other 
brother.  The  latter,  however,  was  so  well  concealed  by  the  roof  that  he  escaped  detec- 
tion, and  the  more  Tiger  peered  into  every  chink  and  cranny,  the  more  disguised  was 
the  place  of  hiding.  This  alternate  seeking  and  hiding  went  on  all  through  the  night 
until  dawn,  when  the  Tiger  slunk  off  into  the  bush.  The  boy  finally  mustered  up 
courage  to  come  down,  and  what  with  the  fright,  fell  in  a  faint  directly  he  reached 
the  floor.  Recovering  consciousness,  he  broke  his  arrow  and  beat  himself  with  the 
two  fragments.'  He  then  ran  away  to  a  good  distance,  and  listened:  no  Tiger.  He 
went  farther  and  listened  again:  still  no  tiger.  And  yet  farther  did  he  go,  and  listened 
once  more:  yes,  he  could  just  hear  the  brute  growling.  Still  faster  did  he  run,  and 
what  with  the  extra  strength  which  he  had  obtained  from  the  broken  arrow,  just 
managed  to  reach  his  old  home  in  safety.  Here  he  tumbled  into  his  hammock,  too 
upset  and  excited  to  talk  to  his  parents.  Next  morning,  however,  he  told  them  the 
whole  story,  and  how  the  Tiger  had  devoured  his  brother.  Now,  staying  in  the  house 
there  happened  to  be  a  champion  tiger  killer,  so  the  father  turned  to  him  and  asked 
him  to  slay  the  creature,  but  he  replied,  "  No.  As  you  are  the  cause  of  the  two  boys 
being  vexed,  and  one  of  them  being  killed,  it  is  your  duty  to  do  it."  The  father 
thereupon  gave  him  a  kind  of  greenish  stone  as  a  present,  and  said  he  would  accom- 
pany him:  the  champion  thereupon  agreed  to  destroy  the  animal.^  The  pair  then 
turned  to  the  men  in  the  company  and  asked  them  to  join  in,  but  they  were  all  too 
frightened.    The  champion  thereupon  twitted  them  on  their  cowardice,  saying: 


1  It  was  a  custom  of  the  old-time  Warraus  thus  to  castigate  themselves  with  the  halves  of  a  broken 
arrow  (Sect.  SSI)  in  the  belief  that  this  would  endue  them  with  strength  and  courage. 

2  All  that  I  can  learn  from  the  old  Warraus  about  the  stone  specially  singled  out  here,  which  they 
caUed  hebvAakka,  is  that  people  in  the  days  of  long  ago  used  to  wear  it  on  their  necklaces,  and  that  it  then 
passed  current  in  trade  and  barter  in  just  the  same  way  as  does  our  money.    (Cf.  Sect.  «41.)— W.  E.  R. 


BOTH]  THE  SPIBITS  OF   THE  BUSH  211 

"Now  is  an  opportunity  for  trying  your  mettle.  I  know  how  well  you  can  thrash 
your  wives.  Let  me  see  how  well  you  can  thrash  a  tiger!  "  This  shamed  them,  and 
a  large  number  agreed  to  go,  but  in  direct  proportion  as  they  got  nearer  and  nearer 
to  the  tiger's  lair,  the  larger  and  larger  became  the  number  of  deserters.  And,  indeed, 
when  they  reached  the  spot,  the  father  and  the  champion  were  again  alone.  The  Tiger 
was  lying  down,  so  the  champion  called  out:  "  Hillo!  A  small  thing  like  you.  Call 
yourself  a  tiger?  Let  us  just  see  if  you  can  hurt  me."  Of  course,  all  this  vexed  the 
animal,  which  then  raised  itself  up  and  showed  fight;  a  poor  fight,  though,  because 
the  champion  easily  slew  him.  And  when  dead,  they  opened  the  belly,  from  which 
they  removed  the  dead  boy's  flesh  and  placed  it  in  a  grave.'  But  they  cut  up  the 
tiger  carcass,  "fine,  fine,  fine."  The  champion  then  turned  to  the  father  and  con- 
soled him  thus:  "  Grieve  no  more  over  your  son.  His  death  has  been  paid  for  [i.  e. 
revenged]  by  that  of  Tiger." 

140.  Don't  Count  your  Chickens  before  they  are  Hatched  (C) 

An  Indian  went  hunting  one  day  far  away  from  his  hut,  so  far  indeed  that  when  he 
thought  of  returning  night  overtook  him.  Losing  his  path  in  the  darkness,  he  lay 
down  to  sleep  under  an  overhanging  wood-ants'  nest.  These  insects  asked  him  by 
and  by  if  he  were  asleep,  and  he  told  them  "Not  yet! "  After  a  while  they  repeated 
their  question  and  received  the  same  answer,  and  so  the  game  went  on  all  night  until 
early  dawn,  when  they  asked  him  for  about  the  tenth  time  whether  he  were  asleep, 
and  as  before  they  were  told  "not  yet!"  The  insects,  who  were  really  only  waiting 
their  opportunity  for  eating  him,  could  restrain  themselves  no  longer,  but  let  themselves, 
together  with  their  nest,  fall  right  on  top  of  him.  Fortunately^,  the  man  had  betaken 
himself  to  a  safe  distance  before  the  scattered  wood-ants  had  time  to  secure  him,  and 
as  they  were  running  hither  and  thither  to  learn  what  road  he  had  taken,  a  humming- 
bird kept  chirping  out,  "Give  me  the  head !  Give  me  the  head ! "  This  was  somewhat 
annoying  to  the  little  insects  who  had  missed  their  intended  victim,  and  as  the  bird 
continued  repeating  its  request,  they  shouted,  "^^^lat  is  the  use  of  asking  for  the  head 
when  we  haven't  got  even  the  body?  " 

140A.  The  Biter  Bit  (C) 

Tawaru-wari  was  a  Carib  Indian  who  one  day  caught  a  young  eagle,  which  he  took 
home  with  him.  It  became  quite  tame,  and  Tawaru-wari  had  to  go  out  regularly  and 
shoot  baboons  to  feed  it  with.  But  the  baboons  did  not  like  this,  so  they  held  a  mee1> 
ing  among  themselves  and  agreed  that  if  the  man  were  to  kill  any  more  of  them, 
they  would  catch  him  and  tie  him  up  to  a  tree.  Tawaru-wari  did  kill  another  baboon, 
however,  very  shortly  afterward.  So  these  animals,  having  surrounded  and  caught 
him,  collected  vine  ropes  with  which  they  tied  him  to  a  tree  trunk,  where,  after  foul- 
ing him  all  over,  they  left  him.  Before  taking  their  departure,  they  said:  "That's 
all  right  now:  the  eagles  will  come  and  eat  him."  This  was  partly  true,  because 
soon  a  big  Eagle  [Thrasyaetus  harpyia],  scenting  the  man  from  afar,  swooped  down 
close  upon  him,  and  asked  him  why  he  was  tied  up  in  that  way.  "Only  because 
I  shot  baboons,  "  was  the  reply.  When  the  Ea^e^asked  him  what  he  shot  them  for,  he 
said  it  was  for  the  purpose  of  feeding  the  young  eagle  that  he  was  minding  at  home. 
When  the  bird  heard  this,  he  loosened  the  vine  ropes,  giving  Tawaru-wari  his  liberty, 
and  supplied  him  with  two  more  baboons  for  the  baby  eagle  to  eat. 

1  Old  Warraus  have  told  me  that  it  was  customary  thus  to  open  the  animal  and  bury  the  human  remains, 
whenever  they  succeeded  in  catching  any  alligator,  camudi,  or  tiger  that  had  recently  secured  a  human 
victim.— W.  E.  R. 


212  ANIMISM  AND  FOLK-LOKB  OP  GUIANA  INDIANS    [bth.  ann.  30 

141.  How  Alligator  Came  to  Hate  his  Present  Shape' 

Adaili  [Hadalli]  is  the  Sun,  but  when  long  ago  he  came  to  earth  in  the  shape  of  a 
man,  he  was  called  Arawidi.  Once,  after  fishing  in  a  favorite  stream,  he  built  a  dam, 
with  the  object  of  retaining  both  the  water  and  the  fish,  for  use  on  subsequent  visits. 
But  the  otters  destroyed  it,  so  he  appointed  the  woodpecker  to  act  as  watchman. 
The  latter  warned  him  with  a  loud  tapping  of  the  proximity  of  an  alligator:  he  hiirried 
along  and  clubbed  the  reptile  so  unmercifully  that  it  ofiered  him  a  girl  for  wife  if  he 
would  only  stop.  Arawidi  accepted  these  terms,  but  to  this  day  the  alligator  shows 
the  marks  of  the  thrashing  on  its  battered  head,  and  in  the  notches  along  its  tail.^ 

143.  How  THE  Birds  Obtained  their  Distinctive  Markings^ 

An  Arawak  hunter  captures  a  Vulture,  daughter  of  Anuamima.*  She  lays  aside  her 
feathers,  appears  before  him  as  a  beautiful  girl,  becomes  his  wife,  bears  him  above 
the  clouds,  and  after  much  trouble  persuades  her  father  and  family  to  receive  him. 
All  then  goes  well  until  he  expresses  a  wish  to  visit  his  aged  mother,  when  they  dis- 
card him  and  set  him  on  the  top  of  a  very  high  tree,  the  trunk  of  which  is  covered 
with  formidable  prickles.  He  appeals  to  all  the  living  creatures  around.  Then 
spiders  spin  cords  to  help  him  and  fluttering  birds  ease  his  descent,  so  that  at  last 
he  reaches  the  ground  in  safety.  Then  follow  his  efforts,  extending  over  several 
years,  to  regain  his  wife.  At  length  the  birds  espouse  his  cause,  assemble  their  forces, 
and  bear  him  as  their  commander  above  the  sky.  At  last  he  is  slain  by  a  valiant 
young  warrior,  resembling  him  in  person  and  feature:  it  is  his  own  son.  The  legend 
ends  with  the  conflagration  of  the  house  of  the  Royal  Vultures.  .  .  .  The  Kiskedee 
[Lanius  sulphuratus],  though  a  valiant  little  bird,  disliked  the  war,  and  bandaged  his 
head  with  white  cotton,  pretending  to  be  sick,  but  being  detected,  was  sentenced 
to  wear  it  continually.  He  is  noted  for  his  hostility  to  hawks  and  other  large  birds, 
which  he  attacks  incessantly  when  on  the  wing.*  .  .  .  The  Warracabba,  or  trumpeter 
bird  [Psophia  crepitans],^  and  another  [the  Sakka-sakkali,  a  kingfisher]  quarreled 
over  the  spoil  and  knocked  each  other  over  in  the  ashes.  The  former  arose  with 
patches  of  gray,  while  the  other  became  gray  all  over.  The  Owl  discovered  among 
the  spoil  a  package  done  up  with  care,  which  he  found  to  contain  Darkness  only; 
he  has  never  been  able  since  to  endure  the  light  of  day. 

143.  The  Deer  and  the  Turtle  (A) 

The  Deer  met  the  Turtle  one  day,  while  cleaning  his  hoofs — for  in  those  days  turtle 
wore  hoofs  and  the  deer  had  claws, — and  said:  "My  friend,  you  have  nice  sandals.' 

I  According  to  Brett  (BrB,  27),  this  is  an  Arawak  story,  but  it  is  practically  identical  with  the  first  part 
of  the  Makusi  legend  of  Maknnaima  and  Fia  (Sect.  39). 

'  According  to  the  Akawais,  during  the  course  of  creation  Makunaima  missed  his  fire,  which  the  marudi 
had  accidentally  swallowed,  and  began  looking  for  it  and  making  inquiries.  The  other  animals  told  him 
that  the  alligator,  whom  they  all  disliked,  had  stolen  It,  so  he  forced  open  the  reptile's  mouth  to  search,  and 
finding  its  tongue  in  the  way,  pulled  it  out.  The  tongue  of  the  alligator,  previous  to  this  calamity,  is  sup- 
posed to  have  been  long.and  fiexible.    ( BrB ,  132. ) 

3  See  BrB,  29. 

*  I  find  that  this  name  should  be  Annu&nna,  the  carrion  crow:  indeed  it  almost  would  seem  that  this 
legend  is  but  an  Arawak  version  of  the  latter  part  of  the  Warrau  story  given  in  Sect,  f  57. — W.  E.  R. 

6  An  Arawak  woman  told  me  that  two  somewhat  similar  birds,  the  Tillili  and  the  Fai-fai-a,  joined  the 
Itiki  (the  Arawak  name  for  the  kiskedee)  in  playing  malingerers.  The  Fai-fai-a  is  now  always  making  a 
kind  of  moaning  noise  to  show  how  much  he  grieves  at  not  having  taken  part  in  the  fray. — W.  E.  R. 

•  In  the  Akawai  story  of  Creation  Brett  (BrB,  131)  speaks  of  the  trumpeter  bird  flying  down  into  an 
ants'  nest,  thus  getting  her  legs,  which  had  previously  been  nice  and  plump,  picked  quite  clean.  On  the 
same  occasion,  the  Marudi  (Penelope  sp.),  thinking  some  glowing  hot  embers  to  be  an  insect,  swallowed, 
them,  and  so  got  his  fiery  throat.    Compare  Brett's  story  in  Sect.  162. 

7  Sandals  are  in  common  use  in  the  hinterland  of  Guiana. 


BOTH]  THE  SPIEITS  OF   THE  BUSH  213 

Let  me  have  a  trial  of  them."  The  Tiirtle,  who  was  very  proud  of  them,  said:  "Cer- 
tainly. Why  not?"  and  handed  them  over,  receiving  in  exchange  the  Deer's  nails. 
When  the  Deer  now  put  on  the  hoofs,  he  found  that  he  could  walk  ever  so  much 
quicker  than  before,  and  trotted  off.  The  poor  Turtle,  however,  found  his  progress 
impeded,  and  stood  still,  waiting  every  minute  for  the  Deer  to  return,  but  he  never 
did  80.^ 

144.  Black  Tigek,  Wau-uta,  and  the  Broken  Arrow  (W) 

There  was  once  a  man  who  had  two  brothers-in-law.  While  he  was  one  of  the 
unluckiest  of  mortals,  they  invariably  returned  home  of  an  afternoon  with  plenty  of 
game.  They  said,  "As  he  has  no  luck,  we  will  lose  liim  away"  [i.  e.  get  rid  of  him]. 
So  one  day  they  took  him  into  the  bush:  all  three  went  in  together,  but  soon  they 
told  him  to  go  in  one  direction  while  they  went  in  another,  arranging  to  meet  at  a 
certain  place.  The  route  which  the  two  wicked  brothers  instructed  him  to  follow 
led  to  the  lair  of  Tobe-horoanna,^  but  the  intended  victim  did  not  know  this.  He 
went  on  and  on  and  came  to  a  big  path,  which  caused  him  to  exclaim,  "Where  am 
I  going  now?  "  While  thus  talking  to  himself,  he  heard  a  great  rushing  noise  approach- 
ing, and  wondered  what  it  was.  He  had  not  long  to  wonder,  because  he  saw  the 
Tobe-horoanna  coming.  He  ran  as  fast  as  he  could  toward  an  immense  tree,  with 
Black  Tiger  after  him.  Running  round  and  round  the  trunk,  the  one  after  the.other, 
the  man  just  managed  to  reach  the  animal's  hind-quarters  and  cut  off  both  its  heels. 
Tiger  then  sat  down,  for  it  could  not  walk  at  all  now.  Next  the  man  shot  it  through 
the  neck  with  his  arrow,  and  after  finishing  the  job  with  a  knife  went  back  home. 
Now  his  two  brothers-in-law,  knowing  well  how  poor  a  hunter  he  was  and  whither 
they  had  sent  him,  never  for  one  moment  doubted  that  they  had  seen  the  last  of 
him.  Hence,  on  his  arrival  at  the  house,  they  were  greatly  surprised,  and  made 
excuses  to  hide  their  guilty  intentions,  saying:  "We  went  to  the  place  where  we  told 
you,  but  you  were  not  there.  We  shouted  for  you,  but  we  received  no  answer.  So 
we  thought  you  were  dead,  and  came  away.  But  we  were  just  coming  to  look  for 
you  again,"  and  more  of  similar  tenor.  Of  course  all  this  was  a  lie.  And  when  the 
man  told  them  that  he  had  actually  killed  the  Tobe-horoanna,  the  two  brothers-in- 
law,  as  well  as  their  old  father,  could  hardly  believe  him,  but  insisted  upon  his  taking 
them  to  the  place.  They  all  went  together,  and  when  at  a  distance  they  saw  Black 
Tiger  on  the  ground  all  except  him  who  had  killed  it  were  afraid  to  go  near.  He  told 
them  again  that  it  was  "all  dead,  dead,"  but  they  were  still  afraid,  so,  to  show  them 
that  h©  spoke  true,  he  boldly  went  up  and  trampled  on  the  carcass.  It  was  only 
now  that  the  old  man  would  approach;  his  two  eons  continued  to  be  afraid,  and  then 
the  whole  party  returned  home.  Upon  arrival  there,  the  old  father-in-law  gave  liim 
another  daughter,  so  that  he  had  two  wives  now,  the  brothers-in-law  built  him  a 
bigger  house,  and  he  was  henceforth  recognized  as  Ai-ja'mo  [i.  e.  chief,  head-man] 
of  the  settlement.  But  our  friend  was  very  anxious  to  have  a  reputation  for  being 
clever  in  hunting  all  other  animals,  in  addition  to  the  glory  he  had  earned  in  ridding 
the  country  of  Tobe-horo-anna.  Whom  could  he  consult  better  than  Wau-uta,  the 
Tree-frog?  '  So  he  went  along  until  he  found  the  tree  wherein  she  resided,  and 
stopping  underneath,  he  commenced  calling  upon  her  to  help  him;  and  he  continued 

1  It  Is  of  interest  to  note  that  among  the  Gran  Chaco  Indians,  the  head  of  a  turtle  should  be  an  'amulet ' 
tor  hunting  deer  ( Nor,  S3) .— W.  E .  B . 

8  Tobe-horo-anna,  signilying  literally  in  Warrau  "  Tigcr-blacli-skin,"  is  the  name  given  to  an  immense 
oruelly-savage  beast  believed  to  exist  in  the  depths  of  the  forest.  From  the  information  which  I  have 
gathered  it  appears  that  this  creature  is  a  tiger  only  when  it  goes  for  a  walk  in  the  bush;  that  at  home  it  is 
"like  a  man,  people." 

>  There  is  some  intimate  connection  between  toads,  frogs,  and  kindred  creatures,  and  success  in  the 
chase.    See  Sect.  i»s. 


214  ANIMISM  AND  POLK-LOEE  OF  GUIANA  INDIANS   [bth.ann.30 

calling  until  the  day  began  to  darken.  But  there  came  no  answer.  Yet  he  went  on 
calling  and  begging  her  to  show  him  all  the  things  that  he  was  so  anxious  to  learn, 
and  now  that  night  came  on,  he  started  crying.  He  knew  fuU  well  that  if  he  cried 
long  enough  she  would  come  down,  just  as  a  woman  does  when,  after  refusing  a  man 
once,  she  finally  takes  pity  when  she  hears  him  weeping.'  As  he  stood  wailing  under- 
neath the  tree,  what  should  come  trooping  up  but  a  whole  string  of  birds,  all  arranged 
in  regular  order,  according  to  size,  from  the  smallest  to  the  largest?  The  little  Doro- 
quara  [Odontophorus]  came  first,  and  pecked  his  feet  with  its  bill,  to  make  him  clever 
in  hunting  it,  and  so  on  in  turn  with  all  the  other  birds,  up  to  the  very  largest.  Wau- 
uta,  you  see,  was  now  beginning  to  take  pity  on  him,  but  of  course  he  did  not  know 
that.  When  all  the  birds  had  finished  with  him,  all  the  Rats  came  in  the  order  of  their 
size,  to  be  followed  by  the  Acouri,  Labba,  Deer,  Bush-hog,  and  so  on  up  to  the  Naba 
[tapir].  As  they  passed,  each  one  put  out  its  tongue,  licked  his  feet,  and  went  on,  so 
as  to  give  him  luck  in  hunting  its  kind.  In  a  similar  manner,  next  came  the  Tigers, 
from  the  smallest  to  the  largest,  all  going  through  the  same  performance  and  passing 
on.  Last  of  all,  the  Snakes  put  in  an  appearance,  did  the  same  thing,  and  crept  past. 
Of  course,  time  was  required  for  this  performance  and  it  was  not  until  daybreak  that 
it  was  brought  to  a  completion,  when  the  man  finally  ceased  his  weeping.  With  the 
daylight  he  saw  a  stranger  approach.  This  was  Wau-uta,  who  was  carrying  a  curious 
looking  arrow.  "So  it  was  you  making  all  that  noise  last  night  and  keeping  me 
awake,  was  it?"  "Yes,"  replied  the  man,  "it  was."  "Well,"  said  Wau-uta,  "look 
down  your  arm  from  your  shoulder  to  your  hand."  He  looked  accordingly,  and  saw 
it  was  covered  with  fungus;  he  looked  at  his  other  arm,  which  was  just  the  same. 
It  was  this  same  fungus  that  had  always  given  him  bad  luck,  so  he  promptly  scraped 
it  all  off.*  Wau-uta's  arrow  was  very  curious  looking,  as  said  before.  It  had  been 
broken  into  three  or  four  pieces,  which  had  been  subsequently  spliced.  Wau-uta 
now  gave  it  to  the  man  in  exchange  for  her  own,  and  bidding  him  put  it  to  his  bow, 
told  him  to  shoot  at  a  thin  vine  rope  '  hanging  a  long  way  oft:  the  arrow  hit  the  mark. 
Replacing  the  arrow  on  the  bowstring,  Wau-uta  instructed  him  to  shoot  into  the  air, 
and  in  whatever  direction  he  sent  his  arrow,  so  soon  as  it  came  to  earth  it  stuck  into 
something — ^first  of  all  a  doroquara,  and  so  on  in  the  same  rotation  of  birds  that  had 
pecked  his  feet,  right  up  to  the  powis;  every  time  a  different  bird,  and  yet  he  himself 
could  see  nothing  when  he  started  the  arrow  on  its  flight.  As  he  went  on  shooting 
into  the  air  in  all  directions,  he  found  that  he  had  hit  a  rat,  an  acouri,  etc.,  until  there 
fell  to  his  arrow  a  beautiful  tapir.  Continuing  to  shoot  as  directed,  he  knocked  over 
the  tigers  and  snakes  according  to  their  proper  order.  When  all  this  was  finished, 
Wau-uta  told  him  he  might  keep  this  broken  arrow,  for  which  she  would  accept  his 
in  exchange,  but  on  condition  that  he  must  never  divulge  to  anyone  that  it  was  she 
who  had  taught  him  to  be  so  good  a  marksman.  They  then  said  good-by  and  parted 
company.  Our  friend  returned  home  to  his  two  wives,  and  soon  gained  as  great  a 
reputation  for  stocking  his  babracote  as  he  already  bore  for  his  bravery  in  killing  the 
Tobe-horoanna.  All  did  their  level  best  to  discover  the  secret  of  his  success:  they 
asked  him  repeatedly,  but  he  refused  to  tell.  So  they  bided  their  time,  and  induced 
him  to  attend  a  big  paiwarri  feast.  The  same  old  story:  Drink  proved  his  undoing; 
he  let  loose  his  tongue,  and  divulged  what  had  happened.  Next  morning,  after 
regaining  consciousness  he  went  to  fetch  his  arrow,  the  one  that  Wau-uta  had  given 
him,  but  he  found  it  replaced  by  his  own  that  he  had  given  in  exchange.  From  that 
time  he  lost  all  his  luck. 

1  This  was  the  exact  explanation  given  when  I  interrupted  my  informant,  to  ascertain  why  the  crying 
took  place.— W.  E.  E. 

'  In  the  Arawak  story  of  Adaba  (Sect.  US)  it  is  the  fungus  on  the  arrow  itself  which  prevents  it  hitting 
the  mark. 

•  In  the  Arawak  story  just  referred  to  a  fishing-line  serves  the  purpose  of  the  vine  rope. 


BOTH]  THE   SPIRITS   OF   THE  BUSH  215 

145.  The  Stort  of  Adaba  (A) 

There  were  once  three  brothers  who  went  out  to  hunt,  taking  their  sister  with  them. 
Far  out  in  the  bush  they  built  a  banab,  where  the  sister  was  left  all  alone,  while  they 
wandered  about  in  search  of  game.  Every  day  the  three  brothers  went  hunting  in 
all  directions,  but  never  brought  back  any  meat  except  a  powis.  This  happened  for 
many  days.  Now  there  was  an  Adaba  [tree-frog]  Uving  in  a  hollow  tree  [Sect.  144] 
which  contained  a  little  water,  close  to  the  banab,  and  one  afternoon  he  was  singing 
his  song,  Wang!  Wang!  Wang!  when  the  girl  heard  him.  "What  are  you  holloing 
for?"  she  said;  "it  would  be  much  better  if  you  stopped  that  noise  and  brought  me 
some  game  to  eat"  [Sect.  ISO].  So  the  Adaba  stopped  holloing,  changed  himseU 
into  a  man,  went  away  into  the  bush,  and  returned  in  about  two  hours  with  some 
meat  for  her.  "Cook  this,"  he  told  her,  "before  your  brothers  come  back:  as  usual 
they  will  return  with  nothing."  Adaba  spoke  truly,  for  soon  after  the  three  brothers 
came  back  empty-handed.  You  can  imagine  their  surprise  when  they  saw  their 
sister  barbecuing  plenty  of  meat  and  a  strange  man  lying  in  one  of  their  hammocks. 
Yes,  he  was  a  strange  man  indeed:  he  had  stripes  all  the  way  down  his  thin  legs,  and 
he  wore  a  lapcloth;  otherwise  he  was  quite  naked.  They  spoke  to  him,  and  they  said, 
"How  day"  to  one  another.  After  Adaba  had  asked  them  whether  they  had  been 
hunting,  and  was  informed  that  they  had  shot  nothing,  he  told  them  he  would  like 
to  see  the  arrows  they  were  using.  When  they  showed  him  these,  he  burst  into  a 
hearty  laugh,  and  pointing  to  the  fimgus  that  was  growing  everywhere  on  them,  said 
that  so  long  as  they  did  not  remove  this  stuff  their  arrows  would  never  shoot  straight 
[Sect.  144]-  He  also  cleaned  their  arrows  for  them.  Adaba  then  told  their  sister 
to  spin  a  fishing-line  which,  when  completed,  he  tied  between  two  trees.  He  next 
told  the  brothers  to  take  aim  at  the  fishing-line,  with  the  cleaned  arrows,  and  shoot. 
They  did  so,  and  each  brother's  arrow  stuck  into  the  very  center  of  the  fishing  line. 
Adaba  also  had  a  curious  trick  in  shooting  with  his  arrow,  because  instead  of  taking 
aim  at  an  animal  direct,  he  would  point  the  arrow  up  into  the  sky,  so  that  in  its  descent 
it  would  stick  into  the  creature's  back.  The  brothers  began  to  learn  this  method, 
and  soon  became  such  adepts  at  it  that  they  never  missed  anything.  Indeed  the 
brothers  became  so  proud  of  themselves  and  of  Adaba  that  they  took  him  home  with 
them,  and  made  him  their  brother-in-law.  And  Adaba  lived  a  long,  long  time  very 
happily  with  their  sister.  But  one  day,  the  woman  said  to  him,  "Husband,  let  us  go 
and  have  a  bath  in  the  pond."  They  went  away  together,  and  when  they  reached 
there,  the  wife  got  in  first  and  called  upon  Adaba  to  come  in  also.  But  he  said:  "No, 
I  never  batlie  in  places  like  this,  in  ponds.  My  bathing-place  is  in  the  water-holes 
inside  the  hollow  trees."  So  she  dashed  some  of  the  water  over  him,  and  after  doing 
so  three  times,  she  jumped  out  of  the  pond  and  rushed  to  seize  him,  but  directly  she 
put  her  hands  on  him,  he  turned  himself  into  a  frog  again,  and  hopped  away  into  the 
hollow  tree,  where  he  still  is.  When  the  sister  came  back  home  again,  her  brothers 
asked  her  where  their  brother-in-law  was  and  all  she  would  tell  them  was  that  he  had 
gone  away.  But  they  happened  to  know  how  and  why  he  had  gone  away,  and  so  they 
beat  their  sister  unmercifully.  This,  however,  did  not  mend  matters,  because  Adaba 
never  came  out  of  the  hollow  tree  again  to  bring  them  luck.  The  three  brothers  often 
went  out  himting  after  that,  but  they  never  brought  back  of  an  evening  anything 
like  the  quantity  of  game  that  they  used  to  get  when  Adaba  was  present. 

146.  Why  the  Indians  Ejxled  Black  Tiger  (W) 

A  man  went  to  fish.  He  went  far  into  the  bush  to  the  upper  creeks,  and  while 
fishing  heard  a  noise  like  thunder,  but  did  not  pay  much  attention  to  it.  By  and 
by  he  heard  the  noise  again;  this  made  him  exclaun  "Well!  ^Vhat  can  that  be?" 
When  he  came  to  think  over  the  matter,  he  recognized  that  the  sound  came,  not  from 


216  ANIMISM  AND  FOLK-LORE  OF  GUIANA  INDIANS    [bth.ann.3Q 

the  clouda,  but  from  some  spot  on  the  earth.  The  horrible  sound  approached  closer, 
and  he  now  knew  it  was  the  voice  of  Tobe-horoanna,  the  Black-skin  Tiger.  "I  must 
get  away  from  here,"  he  said,  and  with  this  he  fell  into  the  water  and  hid  under  a 
tree-root  alongside  the  creek  bank.  Tiger  now  reached  the  spot,  sniffed  away,  and 
felt  right  round  the  root.  As  he  crept  along  one  side  the  man.  shifted  his  position 
to  the  other.  It  was  time  now  for  the  man  to  say,  "I  shall  die  if  I  stay  here;  I 
must  get  away."  Suiting  his  actions  to  the  words,  he  dived  from  under  the  tree-root 
deep  into  the  water.  After  a  while  he  put  just  his  nose  above  the  surface  to  catch 
his  breath  and  then  went  down  again.  He  repeated  this  performance  a  second  time, 
and  again  a  third  time,  when  he  landed  on  shore.  Here  he  started  running  as  hard 
as  he  could  go.  By  and  by  he  stopped  to  listen  whether  anything  was  coming  up 
behind,  but  he  heard  nothing.  Nevertheless  he  rushed  on  again,  and  after  a  while 
stopped  to  listen  as  before,  when  he  distinctly  heard  the  Tiger  following  him.  Running 
as  fast  now  as  pQssible,  he  managed  to  reach  home  in  safety,  and  told  his  wife  and  thef 
other  people  in  the  settlement  to  clear  out  at  once,  as  Tobe-horoanna  was  coming 
along.  He  and  his  family  accordingly  got  into  their  corial  and  paddled  away  down 
the  creek,  but  all  the  other  occupants  of  the  settlement  paid  no  heed  to  the  warning— 
they  said  the  man  was  lying.  The  corial  went  gaily  along  the  stream  and  after  two 
days'  paddling  the  man  said,  "I  wonder  what  has  happened  to  my  friends  at  the  settle- 
ment, ' '  and  thereupon  returned  to  find  out.  When  he  got  back,  there  was  not  a  single 
person  to  be  seen :  he  saw  only  blood  all  over  the  place  as  well  as  scattered  beads  from 
necklaces,  bracelets,  and  garters,  but  no  bodies  anywhere.  He  then  said,  "I  must 
see  where  this  Tobe-horoanna  has  gone.  I  will  collect  the  remnants  of  my  people  and 
kill  him  in  payment  for  my  friends."  So  he  traveled  far  and  wide  and  gathered 
together  the  remnants  of  his  people.  Having  made  plenty  of  arrows  and  lances, 
they  all  proceeded  to  where  Tobe-horoanna  had  his  lair,  and  at  last  reached  a  large 
open  space  in  front  of  which  was  an  immense  tree.  Up  this  they  clambered  and  then 
one  of  them  blew  his  shell.  Tiger  heard  the  noise  and,  replying  with  a  terrible  roar, 
advanced  toward  the  tree,  where  he  was  met  with  a  volley  of  lances  and  arrows,  but 
these  had  no  effect  on  him.  Tiger  drew  nearer,  and,  as  he  reached  the  spot  exactly 
below  the  hiding-place  of  the  people,  they  all  jumped  upon  the  immense  brute's  back. 
This  contained  a  large  cavity,  so  they  were  able  to  work  with  their  axes  from  the  inside, 
and  soon  Tobe-hoioanna  fell  dead.  After  they  had  thus  killed  and  cut  him  up,  they 
blew  their  shell  again,  but  getting  no  answer,  knew  that  there  were  no  more  tigers 
about.  They  then  said,  "Let  us  go  see  where  Tobe-horoanna  lived,"  and  after  a  while 
they  discovered  the  spot:  it  was  a  rocky  cavern  as  big  as  this  house.  Looking  care- 
fully around,  they  found  a  number  of  human  heads  at  the  cave-mouth,  and  searching 
further  they  came  across  Tiger's  baby.  Although  this  creature  was  as  big  as  a  Maipuri, 
it  could  not  walk  yet;  nevertheless  all  helped  to  kill  it,  and  when  they  had  beaten 
the  carcass  out  of  shape,  they  returned  home. 

liTl.  Bravery  Rewarded  with  a  Wife  (W)' 

Some  men  were  out  hunting,  when  they  came  across  a  dead  mora  tree  that  had  a 
daiha  creeper "  growing  over  it.  So  soon  as  they  reached  home  they  told  their  wives, 
who  were  very  glad  to  hear  of  the  find,  and  arranged  among  themselves  to  go  next 
day  to  gather  the  bark.  They  took  a  little  boy  with  them  for  company,  and,  having 
reached  the  spot  indicated,  started  removing  the  bark.  Each  pounded  a  piece  to  make 
it  pliable,  and  while  they  were  thus  engaged,  the  child  amused  himself  by  climbing 
into  a  manicole  tree.  The  noise  made  by  their  wooden  staves  drowned  the  roar  of 
an  immense  Tiger,  which,  before  they  were  aware  of  its  presence,  suddenly  appeared 

>  For  another  Warrau  version  of  this  story,  see  Sect.  SSIB. 

2  The  daiha  is  the  tree  (Lecylhia),  the  cortex  of  which  is  used,  after  pounding  and  other  preparation, 
tor  making  apron-belts,  chemises,  and  cloaks. 


BOTH]  THE   SPIRITS   OF   THE   BUSH  217 

among  them,  and  without  giving  them  a  chance  of  escape  killed  every  one — all 
except  the  little  boy,  who,  like  a  watchman,  could  see  everything  that  took  place. 
He  saw  the  Tiger  eat  a  piece  out  of  this  body  and  a  bit  out  of  that,  finally  dr^grng 
the  bodies  into  the  bush.  As  soon  as  the  coast  was  clear,  the  child  slid  down  the  tree, 
'an  fast  down  to  the  landing,  jumped  into  the  corial,  and  loosening  it  from  its  moorings 
shoved  off.  He  was  only  just  in  time,  because  Tiger  was  after  him,  but  unable  to, 
catch  up  with  him,  on  account  of  being  gorged  with  human  flesh.  The  boy  reached 
home  all  in  a  tremble,  and  could  not  speak,  but  next  morning  told  the  men  about 
everything  that  had  taken  place,  and  how  all  their  women  had  been  killed.  The 
men  then  went  off  to  kill  the  Tiger,  but  when  they  reached  the  spot  they  saw  only 
blood:  they  went  farther,  and  one  of  them,  Tobe-akuba,  recognized  the  body  of  his 
wife,  whose  breasts  had  been  eaten  away:  stiU  farther  on  they  found  another  body, 
also  mutilated,  and  so  on,  one  after  the  other.  At  last  they  came  across  the  Tiger,  but 
what  with  the  ghastly  scenes  that  they  had  just  witnessed,  all  except  two  of  the  search 
party  turned  cowards,  and  climbed  for  safety  up  the  neighboring  trees.  The  two 
exceptions  were  Tobe-akuba  and  Sika-waka  [lit.  jigger-plenty],  the  latter  being  half- 
lame  owing  to  the  number  of  jiggers  that  infested  his  feet.  These  two  men  alone 
fought  that  tiger  and  ultimately  managed  to  destroy  it.  When  he  was  stone  dead, 
Tobe-akuba  called  on  the  remainder  of  the  search  party  to  come  down  from  under 
cover  of  the  trees  which  they  had  climbed  during  the  progress  of  the  fight.  He  then 
taunted  them,  "You  have  no  jiggers  in  your  feet  as  this  man  has,  and  yet  none  of  you 
dared  come  help  me  as  he  did. "  After  leaving  all  their  dogs  behind  to  eat  Tiger's 
carcass,  they  returned  home,  where  Tobe-akuba  picked  out  the  jiggers  from  Sika- 
waka's  feet,  and  then  gave  him  his  daughter  to  wife.  When  ten  days  were  finished, 
they  went  to  fetch  their  dogs,  but  the  latter  had  not  yet  devoured  all  the  flesh,  and  did 
not  want  to  return;  so  they  went  for  them  again  after  another  ten  days  had  passed, 
by  which  time  all  Tiger's  flesh  had  been  consumed.  You  can  easily  learn  from  this 
what  a  big  brute  he  must  have  been. 

148.  Why  Black  Tiger  Killed  the  Indians  (W) 

One  day  Tobe-horoanna  caught  a  young  man  out  in  the  bush  and,  dragging  him 
home,  put  him  inside  the  pot,  saying:  "You  must  not  be  frightened.  I  do  not  intend 
killing,  cooking,  and  eating  you.  You  are  going  to  live."  When  Black  Tiger's 
brother  and  sister  came  home  they  said:  "We  have  heard  that  you  caught  a  young 
man.  Whereishe?"  "In  the  pot,  "replied  Tobe-horoanna.  "Have  you  fed  him?" 
was  their  next  inquiry,  and  upon  receiving  a  negative  reply,  they  said,  "Well,  give 
him  a  bush-hog,  and  if  he  does  not  finish  the  whole  of  it,  we  shall  have  to  finish  him." 
The  man  was  indeed  frightened  to  hear  his  captors  talking  like  this,  and  when  they 
gave  him  the  hog,  did  his  best  to  eat  it,  but  by  the  time  he  had  stowed  away  the  two 
hind  legs  his  belly  could  hold  no  more.  Tobe-horoanna  then  handed  him  a  calabaahful 
of  cassiri,  telling  him  to  drink  it  all,  but  the  poor  fellow  insisted  that  his  belly  was 
full,  and  that  he  could  not  possibly  do  so.  However,  as  they  all  three  insisted  on  his 
drinking,  he  swallowed  the  cassiri,  but  he  was  forced  almost  immediately  to  vomit  it 
all.  "Eh?  What  are  you  doing?"  said  Black  Tiger  who,  thinking  there  must  be 
something  wrong  in  the  man's  mouth,  got  his  brother  to  help  hold  him,  and  keep  his 
jaws  open  while  he  should  pour  more  cassiri  down.  But  their  sister  told  them  to 
let  the  man  alone,  as  she  had  taken  a  liking  to  him,  and  wanted  to  live  with  him. 
Therefore  they  loosened  him,  but  told  him  to  go  into  the  bush  and  hunt,  so  as  to  show 
them  that  he  could  support  a  wife.  When  he  returned  next  time  from  the  forest, 
he  brought  back  with  him  ten  dried  bush-hogs,  which  made  Tobe-horoanna  say:  "All 
right!  I  am  satisfied.  You  can  have  my  sister. "  Thus  the  man  came  to  live  a  long 
time  there  with  his  Tiger  wife,  who  ultimately  bore  him  twin  sons.  As  the  children 
became  older,  and  could  manage  to  crawl  and  creep,  the  father  was  minding  them 


218  ANIMISM  AND  POLK-LOEE  OF  GUIANA  INDIANS   [bth.ann.30 

while  his  wife  went  out  to  the  field:  all  of  a  sudden  they  growled  and  made  a  noise 
just  like  Naharani  [thunder].  This  frightened  him  somewhat,  but  when  their  mother 
returned  she  told  him  that  such  a  noise  really  meant  nothing,  that  it  was  but  the  same 
row  which  the  Black  Tiger  nation  always  made  when  they  traveled  in  the  bush. 
Soon  after  this  he  began  to  feel  homesick,  and  told  his  wife  that  he  proposed  visiting 
his  mother  and  sister;  and  he  went.  How  happy  indeed  was  the  welcome  he  met  at 
hia  old  home,  where  they  had  long  given  him  up  for  lost.  His  mother  asked  him 
whether  he  had  a  wife,  and  when  she  learned  that  he  had  not  only  a  wife,  but  also 
two  boys,  who  could  make  peculiar  noises,  she  begged  him  to  bring  the  famUy  with 
him  when  next  he  paid  her  a  visit.  This  he  did  very  shortly,  but  when  they  reached 
his  mother's  place  all  there  were  drinking  and  the  old  woman's  tongue  was  well 
stimulated.  She  upbraided  him  for  bringing  home  to  her  such  a  daughter-in-law; 
could  he  not  see  that  she  was  not  "  a  proper  people ' '  but  a  tigress,  who  would  fall  upon 
and  destroy  him  some  day?  Was  he  not  ashamed  to  bring  such  an  one  home  to  her? 
and  so  on.  And  in  her  drunken  fury  she  and  her  daughter  killed  him:  his  wife  did 
her  best  to  defend  him,  but  they  slew  her  also.  His  two  boys  would  have  shared  the 
same  fate  had  they  remained,  but  they  managed  to  make  good  their  escape,  and 
reached  home  in  safety.  Uncle  Tobe-horoanna  asked  them,  "Where  is  your  father?" 
"Dead,"  they  replied.  "Where  is  your  mother?"  "Dead  also,"  they  answered. 
When  he  learned  from  them  what  had  happened,  he  became  very  angry,  changed 
himself  into  a  Black  Tiger  again,  trotted  oft  to  the  place  where  they  were  all  drinking, 
and  killed  everyone— mother,  daughter,  and  all  the  guests. 

149.  Bi-MU  [Bahmoo]  and  the  Feog 

To  account  for  the  division  of  mankind  into  races,  the  follomng 
little  story  is  given  by  Brett  (BtB,  167) : '  it  is  not  Arawak. 

Bamu  came  to  visit  some  friends  who  were  about  to  go  frog-hunting — Shunting  for 
none  of  your  small-sized  frogs  but  for  frogs  as  large  as  bush-hogs.  They  told  Bamu 
to  take  a  cudgel  and  come  with  them,  but  he,  being  a  braggart,  said  that  he  did  not 
want  any  weapons,  but  would  jump  on  the  back  of  the  first  frog  he  met  and  twist  its 
neck  around.  The  Chief  of  the  Frogs  heard  him  boast,  and  purposely  squatted  close 
to  the  river  just  in  front  of  the  path  along  which  Bamu  was  coming.  Bamu  made  a 
jump  and  so  did  the  Frog,  right  into  the  water,  the  latter  taking  him  over  to  the  opposite 
bank,  where  he  jerked  him  oft.  When  his  friends  first  saw  Bamu  on  the  Prog's  back 
in  the  water,  they  started  laughing,  and  when  they  saw  him  on  the  other  side,  they 
continued  chafiing,  telling  him  to  twist  the  Frog's  neck  and  bring  the  dead  aniraal 
over  to  them.  Having  finished  their  frog-hunt,  his  friends  again  called  on  him  to  come 
over  and  join  them,  but  he  was  too  much  ashamed  to  swim  back  and  be  laughed  at 
again.  So  it  came  to  pass  that  Bamu  remained  on  that  side,  begat  children,  and 
became  separated  from  us. 

150.  How  THE  Man  Fooled  the  Tiger  (C) 

An  Indian  went  to  a  somewhat  distant  settlement  to  drink  paiwarri,  and  on  arriving 
there  in  the  early  afternoon,  commenced  imbibing.  By  midnight,  the  drinks  being 
finished,  he  started  on  the  return  journey,  although  the  house-master  warned  him 
not  to  leave  then  but  to  wait  for  daybreak,  because  an  immense  Tiger  was  known  to  be 
prowUng  about.  Our  friend  would  not  be  persuaded,  however,  to  postpone  his 
departure,  but  only  said:  "Oh!  never  mind.     I  am  not  afraid,  and  if  I  meet  him  I 


1  The  Booroo  I  Booroo  I  chorus  In  Brett's  verse  is  onomatopoeic  for  the  Bura-bura-u,  the  Arawalc  term  for 
a  certain  frog  with  a  particularly  loud  croalc. 


BOTH]  THE   SPEBITS   OF   THE   BUSH  219 

will  HU  him."  So  saying,  he  hung  his  poto  [stone-club] '  over  his  arm,  and  went 
out  into  the  darkness.  Being  more  or  less  drunk,  he  sta^ered  along,  and  soon  fell 
dead  asleep  on  the  road  just  about  the  very  spot  where  the  Tiger,  of  which  he  had 
been  warned,  used  to  cross.  Tiger  found  Tiim  lying  there  motionless  in  the  early 
morning,  felt  and  sniffed  him  all  over  to  see  whether  he  was  dead  or  alive,  and  finally 
sat  down  on  him.  This  sobered  the  Indian,  and  Tiger,  seeing  that  he  was  aUve, 
started  pulling  down  the  bushes  so  as  to  clear  a  pathway  along  which  he  could  drag 
the  body  to  his  lair.  Having  thus  cleared  a  few  yards,  the  animal  returned  and  slung 
the  man  over  his  back  so  that  the  head  and  arms  hung  over  one  flank  and  the  legs 
over  the  other.  This  gave  the  man  his  opportunity,  for  as  the  animal  carried  him 
along  he  caught  hold  of  the  bushes  with  his  teeth  and  hands  and  so  impeded  Tiger's 
progress.  The  Tiger  thought  that  the  pathway  which  he  had  cleared  was  stilll  too 
narrow,  and  accordingly  replaced  the  burden  on  the  ground  and  pulled  down  more 
bushes.  The  Indian  thus  fooled  his  captor  some  three  or  four  times  and,  having 
now  collected  his  wits,  watched  for  the  tiger  to  sling  him  once  more  on  his  back.  No 
sooner  had  Tiger  done  so,  than  he  struck  the  animal's  head  just  above  the  ear  with  his 
stone-tipped  club,  and  thus  killed  him.  Making  sure  that  Tiger  was  quite  dead, 
he  returned  to  the  place  where  he  had  been  drinking  the  night  before,  and  told  the 
house-master  what  had  happened.  The  latter  would  not  believe  that  any  daninken 
Indian  could  have  killed  so  big  a  tiger,  but  when  he  went  and  saw  with  his  own 
eyes,  he  had  to  admit  that  his  late  guest  had  spoken  truly. 

151.  Among  the  Arawaks  tradition  has  it  that  the  old  stone  axes, 
or  waMli^nor-haro  (lit.  ancients-their-ax),  came  from  a  far  distant 
country,  from  a  place  so  far  away  that  it  took  years  for  those  who 
went  in  search  of  them  to  get  back  home  again.  Many  a  bizarre 
exploit  is  told  in  connection  with  the  search  for  these  stone  imple- 
ments, in  the  same  way  that  many  a  superstition  is  attached  to  the 
weapon  itself  among  several  nations,  both  civilized  and  savage,  else- 
where. The  very  length  of  the  supposititious  journey  to  be  accom- 
plished has  given  opportunity  for  fictions  to  be  introduced  with 
regard  to  the  rivers  and  seas  that  had  to  be  crossed,  and  the  animal 
and  plant  life  met  with  on  the  way.  But  beyond  all  the  exaggera- 
tion consequent  on  the  well-known  desire  of  the  foreign-traveled 
narrator  to  tell  his  stay-at-home  friends  so  much  more  than  his  real 
experiences,  and  after  making  allowances  for  all  the  personal  addi- 
tions and  embellishments  that,  in  the  absence  of  any  written  records, 
must  necessarily  and  pardonably  have  crept  into  the  telling  of  the 
story  from  one  to  another — there  still  flows  through  most  of  these 
extraordinary  adventures  a  sort  of  ethical  undercurrent  conveying 
the  lesson  that  disobedience  to  one's  elders  never  remains  unpunished. 
At  the  same  time,  I  am  not  prepared  to  say  whether  the  introduction 
of  this  ethical  element  is  purposeful  or  accidental  on  the  part  of  the 
old  people,  who  usually  relate  these  legends.  The  following  exploits 
and  occurrences,  as  well  as  others  which  I  can  not  detail  here,  are  all 
comprised  in  a  story  which  I  propose  naming — 

1  Most  ol  the  clubs  have  attached  to  the  handle  a  cotton  ring  through  which  the  wrist  is  passed  so  as  to 
prevent  the  implement  being  dropped  when  fighting. 


220  ANIMISM  AND   FOLK-LOEB   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS    [hth.  ANN.  30 

The  Search  for  the  Stone  Ax  (A) 

There  was  a  corial  full  of  people,  with  a  very  old  man,  a  medicine-man,  in  charge. 
They  were  about  to  search  for  some  stone  axes,  but  as  they  had  a  long,  long  way  to 
go,  their  wives  whom  they  were  leaving  at  home  had  made  a  plentiful  supply  of 
cassava  for  them.  In  the  boat  they  took  also  cassava-sticks,  so  that  when  they 
reached  the  spot  where  the  axes  were  found,  they  might  plant  them,  and  after  reaping 
obtain  cassava  for  their  home  journey.  It  might  be  years  before  they  would  be  able 
to  Bee  -their  wives  and  children  again.  Down  the  river  they  paddled,  out  into  a  sea 
which  had  blue  water  in  it,  and  with  so  many  submerged  rocks  that  there  was  a  great 
risk  of  the  vessel  being  smashed  to  pieces  if  they  went  farther.  The  old  man  told 
the  crew  to  shoot  arrows  into  this  blue  water;  where  an  arrow  sank,  there  did  danger 
lurk;  where  one  floated,  there  the  corial  was  enabled  to  pass.  The  sea  was  ultimately 
crossed  in  safety  by  this  means.     (Cf.  Sect.  3S0.) 

The  HtJKi  Fish  Nation 

152.  They  visited  many  nations.  One  day,  as  they  were  traveling  along,  the  old  man 
told  them  that  they  were  approaching  the  Huri  [Maerodon  sp.]  Fish  Nation  [Sect.  178], 
and  that,  when  they  reached  the  landing  place,  they  would  see  large  numbers  of 
fish  lying  in  the  sand,  but  they  were  neither  to  shoot  them  with  their  arrows  nor 
chop  them  with  their  knives,  because  they  were  really  men  and  women.  What  the 
old  man  said  actually  happened  when  they  landed  that  night.  But  when  all  the 
others  slept,  one  of  the  crew  stealthily  arose,  and  went  down  to  the  water-side  to 
have  another  look  at  these  fish.  He  drew  his  bow,  shot  one  of  the  fish,  roasted  it 
without  making  any  noise,  ate  it  all  by  himself,  and  returned  to  his  hammock  with- 
out anyone  else  apparently  being  the  wiser.  Next  morning  at  early  dawn  a  large 
body  of  Indians  came  trooping  down  to  the  encampment,  and  asked  for  the  head  of 
the  boat's  crew.  The  old  man  arose,  and  said  he  was  the  head  of  the  crew.  The 
Indians  said,  "One  of  our  men  is  lost:  we  suppose  some  of  your  party  have  killed 
him."  Turning  to  his  crew,  the  old  man  made  inquiry  as  to  whether  anyone  had 
been  killed  while  he  had  been  sleeping,  but  of  course  received  a  negative  reply. 
So  the  Indians  took  the  old  man  with  his  whole  party  away  out  back  to  their  own 
camp.  Arrived  there,  they  put  water  into  a  large  pot  over  the  fire.  When  boiled, 
they  gave  to  each  of  the  visitors,  beginning  with  the  old  man,  a  calabashful  of  the 
hot  water  to  drink,  so  as  to  make  each  one  vomit.  The  individual  who  had  killed 
and  roasted  the  fish  remained  to  the  last:  when  he  was  called,  he  did  not  want  to 
go,  so  the  Indians  took  him  by  force  and  compelled  him  to  have  a  drink.  And  as 
soon  as  he  had  drunk,  he  vomited  all  the  bits  of  the  forbidden  fish.  They  said, 
"You  are  the  one  that  killed  bur  brother."  Whereupon  they  threw  him  into  the 
boiling  pot,  in  the  presence  of  all  his  comrades.  The  old  man  and  his  crew  were 
now  free  to  resume  their  journey. 

How  the  Ant-eater  Fooled  the  Man 

153.  They  went  on  again  and,  reaching  another  country,  woke  up  one  morning  very 
hungry.  The  old  man  sent  all  his  crew  out  a-hunting,  and  told  them  that  no  matter 
what  animal  they  saw,  they  were  to  shoot  with  their  arrows,  or  club  it,  as  the  cir- 
cumstances warranted.  With  one  exception,  they  all  did  as  they  were  told  and 
brought  back  late  in  the  afternoon  plenty  of  game.  The  disobedient  one  was  tired, 
and  went  to  sleep  in  his  hammock  the  greater  part  of  the  day;  he  went  out  into  the 
bush  only  as  the  sun  was  already  in  the  west.  He  took  only  his  knife  with  him. 
He  had  not  walked  very  far  when  he  came  on  a  large  ant-eater  lying  fast  asleep  in 
the  shade.  So  soundly  was  it  sleeping  that  it  allowed  the  man  to  come  quite  close. 
Then  he  touched  it  with  his  big  toe,  and  said:  "Hullo!    I  wonder  what  has  killed 


BOTH]  THE   SPIRITS   OF   THE   BUSH  221 

you;  but  as  you  are  yet  quite  fresh,  I  will  take  you  home."  He  accordingly  went 
in  search  of  a  piece  of  strong  bark-strip  wherewith  to  tie  up  the  animal  and  carry  it. 
He  was  very  slow,  and  sauntered  about  carelessly,  and  when  he  had  secured  the 
strip,  he  even  then  dallied  in  returning  where  the  carcass  lay.  But  when  he  did 
get  back  to  the  spot,  lo  and  behold,  the  ant^-eater  was  gone!  He  looked  up,  and  he 
looked  down,  and  he  looked  all  about.  "This  is  the  very  spot,"  he  said,  "where  I 
saw  it  lying  dead.  Some  one  must  have  taken  it  away."  When  finally  he  returned 
empty-handed  to  the  camping-place,  he  told  the  rest  of  the  crew  what  had  happened. 
The  old  man  said:  "You  are  a  fool.  The  ant-eater  was  not  dead,  but  only  sleeping. 
Didn't  you  see  it  blowing?  "  (i.  e.,  breathing).  They  all  laughed  heartily  at  him,  and 
he  recognized  only  too  late  that  if  he  had  obeyed  orders,  he  would  have  had  something 
good  to  eat. 

How  THE  Indians  Learned  to  Paddle 

154.  Another  country  which  they  visited  in  the  course  of  their  peregrinations  was 
peculiar  in  that  its  inhabitants  could  travel  in  their  corials  only  with  the  tide.  As 
a  matter  of  fact,  they  had  paddles,  but  did  not  know  how  to  use  them  in  the  proper 
way:  they  held  the  paddle  edgeways  instead  of  broadside  to  the  water.  Furthermore, 
this  method  of  progression  entailed  always  having  to  travel  with  a  very  long  pole. 
When  the  tide  turned  against  them,  they  would  drive  this  pole  into  the  bottom  of  the 
stream,  and  make  fast  their  corial  to  it  until  the  tide  turned  again.  The  old  leader, 
who,  as  has  already  been  stated,  wasamedicine-man,  changed  himself  into  a  bunia,  and 
yelled  out  its  note  Tarharan!  Tarbaran!  •  Now,  when  some  of  the  people  who  were  pad- 
dUng  in  this  curious  fashion  heard  what  the  bird  said ,  they  were  annoyed ,  and  remarked : 
"Nonsensel  If  we  were  to  take  the  broadsides  of  our  paddles  and  hit  you  on  the  head 
with  them,  how  would  you  like  it?"  But  the  bird  still  continued  shrieking,  Tar- 
baranl  Tarbaran/  and  would  not  stop.  So  each  paddler  at  last  turned  his  paddle 
round,  and  pulled  it  broadside  with  the  water,  and  found  he  could  travel  three  times 
as  fast  as  before.  And  then  all  the  others  and  their  friends  tried  the  new  method 
tibiat  the  bimia  had  shown  them,  and  foimd  that  by  this  means  they  could  go  up  and 
down  the  stream  quite  independent  of  the  current.  They  never  used  their  paddles 
edgewise  again.' 

The  Big  Bats 

156.  The  search  party  continued  their  journey,  and  at  nightfall  reached  a  landing. 
Now  this  was  in  the  country  of  the  Bat  Tribe,  and  the  old  man  warned  his  crew  that  it  was 
very  dangerous  for  them  to  sling  their  hammocks  on  the  trees  (aa  Indians  usually  do 
in  the  dry  season)  because  the  Bats  here  were  as  large  as  cranes.  He  therefore  called 
on  them  to  build  an  inclosed  camp,  that  is,  a  banab  with  covered  sides.  One  young  man, 
however,  was  slothful,  and  very  backward  in  assisting  the  others  to  buUd  the  shelter.  He 
said  he  did  not  believe  that  the  Bats,  however  big  they  were ,  would  hurt  him  before  the 
morning.  In  spite  of  the  old  man's  entreaties,  he  refused  to  come  into  the  inclosure, 
but,  fixing  his  hammock  between  two  trees,  rested  outside.  The  others  did  as  they 
were  told,  slinging  their  hammocks  inside  the  banab.  Late  in  the  night,  when  it 
was  quite  dark,  they  heard  the  man  outside  entreating  to  be  allowed  to  come  in. 
But  they  said:  "No.  We  cannot  open  the  door  now.  You  must  bear  what  comes 
on  you  [i.  e.  you  must  take  the  consequences].  "  And  when  they  opened  the  door  in 
the  morning,  all  that  was  left  of  the  individual  was  some  bones.  The  Bats  had  sucked 
him  dry  indeed. 

'  This  word  in  Arawak  means  "broadside.*' 

8  There  is  an  island  in  the  Esseqiiibo  just  above  Groote  Creek  called  hiarono-dulluhing(woman'spole). 
The  story  goes  that  once  upon  a  time  the  women  there  were  traveling  in  the  old-fashioned  way  with  the 
paddles  edgewise,  When  the  tide  being  against  them,  they  fixed  the  pole  as  usual  in  the  mud.  But  they 
drove  it  in  so  flrihly  that  they  could  not  get  it  out  again,  with  the  result  that  it  remained  there.  The 
timbers,  grasses,  and  sand  collected  round  it,  forming  the  present  island. 


222  ANIMISM   AND  FOLK-LOBE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS    [eth.ann.30 

The  Magic  Boat 

156.  On  and  on  the  party  went,  and  in  the  afternoon  they  came  to  a  landing  where  there 
was  a  beautiful  canoe  with  a  paddle  inside  it.  But  the  old  man  warned  them  to  leave 
it  strictly  alone.  "  Don't, "  he  said,  "any  of  you  get  into  that  boat,  because  it  you  do, 
even  without  touching  the  paddle,  you  will  be  carried  off  immediately,  and  we  shall 
never  see  you  again. "  They  all  took  heed,  except  one  man,  and  went  to  sleep.  This 
one  man  kept  awake  and  could  not  sleep:  the  more  he  thought  of  the  boat,  the  greater 
was  his  desire  to  go  and  have  another  look  at  it.  He  quickly  slipped  out  of  his  ham- 
mock, and  gazing  at  its  graceful  lines,  began  wishing  that  he  had  so  beautiful  a  canoe 
for  himself.  He  approached  nearer  and  nearer,  admiring  it  more  and  more,  until  he 
finally  jumped  in.  No  sooner  had  he  done  so,  than  the  vessel  went  off  with  him, 
and  neither  boat  nor  occupant  was  seen  again.' 

The  Amazons 

157.  Again  they  all  started  away,  and  after  a  time  arrived  at  a  landing-place  whence 
an  Indian  house  could  be  seen.  With  the  old  man  leading  his  crew  Indian-file  up  the 
pathway,  they  soon  reached  the  house,  where  they  asked  for  lodging  that  night.  An 
old  woman  came  out  and  said,  "We  are  all  females  living  in  this  settleinent. "  This 
was  quite  true.  There  were  several  houses  in  the  settlement,  but  all  full  of  women — 
not  a  boy  nor  a  man  to  be  seen  anywhere .  ' '  All  those  who  pass  this  way  have  to  remain 
at  least  a  year  with  us  before  we  allow  them  to  proceed  on  their  journey.  We  will  do 
our  best  to  make  you  happy  while  you  stay.  Both  you,  old  man,  and  every  one  of 
your  companions  must  take  two  or  three  of  our  women  to  wife.  At  the  end  of  the 
year,  those  of  you  who  become  fathers  of  girls  are  free  to  go  your  way,  but  those  to 
whom  boys  are  bom  must  stay  with  us  from  year  to  year  until  you  beget  girls.  You 
now  know  what  is  expected  of  you. "  The  boat's  crew,  recognizing  that  there  was  no 
help  for  it,  made  up  their  minds  to  stay.  Now  the  woman  in  charge  was  indeed  a  sly 
old  dame.  To  every  hammock  she  attached  a  rattle,  and  then  kept  awake  all  night. 
If  she  heard  the  rattle  sounding  frequently,  she  knew  that  everything  was  as  it  should 
be.  But  when  the  rattle  remained  silent,  she  would  proceed  to  that  particular  ham- 
mock [atque  commonuit  marem  ut  neligeret  ofBcium  suum].  The  men  had  only  to 
give  good  cause  for  the  rattles  shaking  all  night. 

Of  a  morning  the  females  went  hunting  with  the  bows  and  arrows,  or  else  they  went 
fishing,  just  reversing  the  usual  order  of  things,  and  leaving  the  men  in  the  hammocks 
to  rest.  It  was  naturally  many  years  before  the  crew  finally  got  away  from  this  settle- 
ment.^ 

'  Here  follow  a  whole  series  oJ  exploits,  all  detailing  the  results  consequent  on  disobeying  the  old  man's 
instructions.  They  arrived  at  a  place  where  there  was  a  field  full  of  ripe  plantains,  of  which  they  are  told 
they  might  pick  two  each,  but  no  more.  Among  the  crew  was  a  greedy  man,  who  did  eat  more,  and  at 
night  the  rest  of  the  party  were  awakened  by  the  noise  caused  by  his  grinding  his  teeth  so  loudly:  looking 
into  the  hammock  whence  the  noise  proceeded,  they  saw  that  its  occupant  had  been  changed  into  a  tiger. 
At  another  place  they  passed  a  house  where  some  cassava  cakes  had  been  left  to  dry  on  the  troolie  roolj 
there  were  no  occupants  anywhere, to  be  seen,  and  the  old  man  gave  orders  that  the  cassava  was  not  to  be 
touched.  He,  being  a  piai-man,  could  distinguish  the  Yawahus  (Spirits),  who  were  invisible  to  the 
remainder  of  the  crew.  One  of  the  latter,  however,  took  one  of  the  cakes  away,  but  he  had  no  sooner  pro- 
ceeded a  few  steps,  than  he  suddenly  disappeared:  he  had  joined  the  Spirits.  Another  scene  shows  the 
search  party  arriving  in  the  coimtry  of  the  Baboon  Tribe,  where  the  old  man  warns  them  not  to  laugh- 
laughter  would  indeed  prove  the  death  of  them.  The  Baboons  performed  all  thedirtiest  tricks  imaginable 
to  excite  the  risibilities  of  the  boat's  crew:  one  of  these  yielded  to  the  temptation  and  was  made  into  pepper 
pot.    And  so  on. 

'  For  a  further  reference  to  Amazons,  see  Sect.  196. 


both]  the  spibits  of  the  bush  223 

The  Country  of  the  Stone  Adzes 

158.  At  last  they  arrived  at  tie  country  of  the  stone  adzes,  where  all  the  people  were 
really  stones,*  and  some  of  these  they  brought  away  with  them.  The  party  finally 
reached  home  again,  and  the  old  man  warned  them  [ut  abstinerent  de  copulatione 
cum  uxoribus  suis  per  tantas  noctes].  One  of  the  men,  however,  disobeying  the 
instructions,  was  punished  in  a  very  peculiar  fashion  by  being  immovably  fixed  in 
[positione  copulationis]. 

159.  How  Turtle  Fooled  the  Yawarri  (W,  C) 

It  was  a  time  of  scarcity  and  drought,  and  the  Bush-rat  [yawarri]  in  the  course  of 
his  search  for  food  came  upon  Turtle,  also  on  the  lookout  for  a  bite.  After  saying 
"How  day?"  to  each  other  and  inquiring  after  their  respective  businesses — ^whence 
they  had  come,  and  whither  they  were  going — they  began  to  discuss  the  hardness  of 
the  times,  and  thus  from  one  thing  to  another,  the  question  finally  arose  as  to  which 
of  them  in  case  of  necessity  could  fast  the  longer.  Each  one's  assurance  of  his  own 
superiority  in  this  respect  led  them  to  arrange  a  competition,  it  being  agreed  that 
the  one  party  should  choose  any  tree,  and  the  other  party  abstain  from  food  until  this 
tree  should  bear  fruit.  Yawarri  accordingly  chose  a  plum  tree  and,  fencing  it  all 
round,  put  Turtle  inside  the  inclosure.  Every  month  did  Yawarri  visit  his  willing 
captive  and  ask  whether  he  were  still  aUve.  "Still  aUve!  ^"hy  not?  No  harm  can 
befall  me,"  was  the  reply  he  received.  This  conversation  was  repeated  once  a  month 
for  six  months,  at  the  end  of  which  time,  the  plum-tree  buds  had  opened,  the  flowers 
had  bloomed,  and  the  ripe  fruit  had  fallen.  So  the  fence  was  broken  down  and  the 
Turtle  let  out.  It  was  now  Yawarri's  turn  to  show  what  he  could  do,  so  Turtle  built 
him  a  fence  around  a  wild  cashew  tree,  shut  him  in,  and  went  away.  At  the  end  of  a 
month  Turtle  came  up  to  the  fence  and  shouted  out  to  Yawarri,  asking  him  if  he  were 
still  alive.  "YesI  alive!"  was  the  answer.  After  the  lapse  of  another  month  Turtle 
visited  him  again  with  the  same  question,  "Yes!  alive!  but  a  bit  exhausted,"  was  the 
reply  on  this  occasion.  On  completion  of  the  third  month,  Turtle  came  again,  but 
this  time  he  received  no  reply  at  all.  Yawarri  was  no  longer  alive:  only  the  flies  on 
his  dead  body  were  alive.  Yawarri  did  not  know  that  the  wild  cashew  bears  fruit 
only  once  in  every  three  or  four  years. 

160.  How  THE  Turtle  Tricked  the  Tiger  (W) 

Tiger  really  wanted  to  eat  the  Turtle,  but  was  a  bit  of  a  coward  and  none  too  sure 
whether  his  intended  victim  was  the  stronger  or  not.  Wishing  therefore  to  find  out, 
he  approached  the  Turtle  and  pretended  to  make  friends.  The  latter,  however,  was 
no  fool,  and  knowing  quite  well  what  reliance  could  be  placed  on  such  a  pretended 
friendship,  saw  that  he  must  exercise  every  craft  and  cunning  to  save  himself.  Tiger 
began  telling  him  what  a  big  strong  man  he  was,  that  he  ate  only  meat,  with  such  and 
such  results,  thinking  thereby  to  impress  Turtle  with  his  physical  superiority.  But 
nothing  daunted.  Turtle  said  he  could  do  the  same,  and  suggested  that  their  respective 
statements  be  put  to  the  proof.  This  was  agreed  on,  Turtle  stipulating  only  that  during 
the  test  they  should  both  keep  their  eyes  shut,  an  arrangement  to  which  Tiger  agreed.' 
"Now,  didn't  I  tell  you?"  said  Turtle,  "that  I  could  do  exactly  the  same  as  you  and 
even  go  one  better?  "  Tiger  was  loth  to  admit  this,  and  therefore  maintained:  "  Welli 
even  if  you  are  stronger  than  I,  I  am  faster  than  you;  I  can  run  more  quickly.    Let 

>  For  tlie  Indian  belief  that  all  mankind  were  derived  originally  from  rocks  and  stones,  see  Sect.  58. 
*  The  details  of  what  now  takes  place  are  identical  with  those  given  in  the  next  story,  in  which  the 
Ant«ater  replaces  the  Turtle. 


224  ANIMISM   AND   FOLK-LOBE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS    [bth.  ANN.  30 

us  have  a  race,  and  prove  it."  They  accordingly  arranged  to  run  to  a  certain  spot, 
along  a  certain  path,  and  whichever  got  there  first  would  be  admitted  to  be  the  faster, 
Turtle  stipulating  only  that  he  must  be  allowed  a  little  time  in  which  to  get  ready. 
Tiger  again  agreed.  Turtle  spent  the  interim  in  visiting  his  many  friends,  telling 
them  what  had  happened,  and  arranging  tor  them  to  place  themselves  at  stated  inter- 
vals along  the  couise  of  the  pathway  where  the  race  was  to  be  run.  The  two  then 
started,  and  Tiger,  taking  a  spring  ahead,  was  soon  out  of  sight.  Tiutle  utilized  the 
opportunity  by  slipping  into  the  bush,  taking  a  short  cut,  and  reaching  the  spot  agreed 
on,  where  he  awaited  his  opponent.  Tiger,  racing  along,  called  out  "Hullo!"  on 
seeing  just  in  front  of  him  a  turtle,  whom  he  believed  to  be  his  friend.  He  raced  on, 
finds  another  turtle  ahead  of  him,  thinks  the  same  thing,  and  so  meeting  turtle  after 
turtle  finally  reaches  the  goal,  where  his  original  "friend  "  had  certainly  arrived  first.' 
Tiger  therefore  had  to  admit,  "Yes,  man,  you  have  beaten  me,"  Turtle  adding:  "So 
you  are  not  after  all  either  the  stronger  or  the  faster.  Come,  let  us  see  who  is  now  the 
cleverer.  I  will  put  marks  on  you  and  you  put  marks  on  me :  that  will  be  a  good  test. ' ' 
The  Tiger  again  agreed.  They  then  started  painting  each  other.  As  to  the  Tiger's 
handiwork,  just  look  at  a  Turtle's  shell,  and  you  will  see  how  roughly  and  slovenly 
the  marking  was  done.  Of  course  Tiger  was  planning  to  get  the  better  of  his  opponent 
if  he  could,  but  the  latter  well  knew  this  and  so  had  to  be  very  smart  in  pleasing  the 
Tiger.  Look  at  the  beautiful  spots  and  stripes  that  Turtle  put  on  him — and  of  course 
Tiger  was  delighted  at  seeing  how  handsome  he  looked,  and  had  to  admit  that  Turtle 
was  cleverer  than  he.  Now  all  the  time  that  they  had  been  talking,  racing,  and 
painting,  they  had  had  nothing  to  eat,  and  hence  Tiger  suggested  their  going  into  the 
depths  of  the  bush,  and  finding  some  game,  but  Turtle,  who  had  good  reasons  for  not 
trusting  his  companion,  refused.  "No!"  he  said,  "You  can  go  and  raise  the  deer 
and  I  will  catch  and  kill  it  for  you."  So  Tiger  went  and  raised  a  deer,  and  drove  it 
down  the  pathway.  In  the  meantime  Turtle  climbed  up  a  dead  log  that  was  lying 
across  the  road,  and  waited:  as  the  deer  raced  underneath  he  dropped  off  the  log 
and,  falling  straight  on  the  animal's  neck,  broke  it.  Turtle  then  sucked  the  dead 
deer's  blood  and  smeared  it  all  over  his  mouth,  so  as  to  make  Tiger,  who  just  then 
came  up  breathless,  believe  that  he  had  caught  and  destroyed  the  animal.  "  I  have 
killed  the  deer  and  eaten  my  share;  you  can  come  and  eat  yours  now."  After  having 
gorged  himself.  Tiger  said,  "Let  us  have  a  nap  now, ''  and  curling  himself  up,  soon 
fell  asleep.  Turtle,  who  kept  awake,  saw  what  a  pretty  necklace  his  companion 
was  wearing  (what  we  Indians  call  a  "tiger-bead  ")  and  became  envious  of  it.^  Turtle 
watched  very  carefully  and,  assured  that  he  was  in  a  deep  slumber,  quietly  and  softly 
removed  the  necklace,  which  he  handed  to  one  of  his  friends  in  the  neighborhood, 
telling  the  latter  to  make  off  with  it.  When  Tiger  at  length  woke,  he  missed  his  necklace 
and  asked  Turtle  where  it  was,  but  the  latter  of  course  said  he  did  not  know.  Tiger, 
however,  accused  him  of  being  the  thief,  and  said  that  whether  he  had  stolen  it  or 
not  he  would  eat  him  unless  he  replaced  it.  Turtle,  however,  protested  that  neck- 
laces were  of  no  use  to  the  like  of  him:  he  had  no  neck  to  put  one  on:  all  he  had  was 
a  back!  Tiger,  however,  insisted  on  killing  him  if  he  didn't  return  it,  but  Turtle, 
who  was  now  on  his  mettle,  let  him  know  that  he  could  not  kill  him  if  he  tried.  Had 
he  not  already  proved  to  him  that  he  was  the  stronger,  the  quicker,  and  the  cleverer? 
On  the  other  hand,  there  was  much  more  reason  for  believing  that  he,  the  little  Turtle, 
could  easily  kill  him,  the  big  Tiger,  if  he  only  wanted  to.  And  thus  they  continued 
contending,  and  finally  they  arranged  to  fight  it  out  to  a  finish,  the  Turtle  only  insisting 
that  each  be  allowed  a  little  time  to  get  ready  for  the  fray.  The  conditions  were  that 
they  should  go  in  opposite  directions,  and  return  within  a  short  interval  to  the  same 
spot,  when  the  fight  must  be  fought  to  a  finish  and  no  quarter  shown.    Tiger  went  his 

1  This  procedure  savors  of  African  origin. 

2  Tliis  "  tiger-bead  necldaco"  is  a  rope- vine  of  some  land  with  more  or  less  globular  enlargements  through, 
out  its  length,  like  beads  threaded  on  a  string. 


BOTH]  THE   SPIRITS   OF   THE  BXJSH  225 

way,  and  on  a  given  signal  returned  to  the  trysting  place.  But  there  was  no  Turtle 
to  be  seen.  Of  course  not!  hadn't  he  crawled  into  a  hole  in  a  log  for  safety?  And  there 
he  still  is,  and  there  Tiger  is  continually  on  the  watch  for  him  to  emerge. 

161.   TlGEK   AND  AnT-EATEE    (C)' 

One  day  Tiger  met  the  Tamanoa  (Great  Ant-eater)  in  the  forest,  and  chaffed  him 
about  his  fuimy  mouth  and  his  clumsy  toes.  "Never  mind,"  said  Tamanoa;  "even 
if  my  mouth  is  small  and  my  feet  are  clumsy,  I  can  eat  at  all  events  meat  quite  as  well 
as  you,  and  I  am  certainly  as  strong  as  you."  "Oh,  no,  indeed  you  are  not!"  replied 
Tiger.  Thus  they  went  on  arguing.  At  last,  Tamanoa  said  he  would  like  to  have 
a  peep  into  his  rival's  mouth,  and  when  Tiger  opened  his  jaws  wide  and  showed  him 
his  fangs,  told  him  he  did  not  think  much  of  them.  This  annoyed  Tiger,  who  then 
wanted  to  look  inside  Tamanoa's  mouth,  and  having  done  so,  exclaimed:  "What! 
Do  you  mean  to  tell  me  that  you  can  eat  meat?  I  don't  believe  you  have  ever  tasted 
itin  your  life."  "You  lie!"  replied  Tamanoa,  "because  it  was  only  this  very  morning 
that  I  finished  the  deer  carcass  that  you  had  left  behind.  [Si  stercua  meum  observes], 
you  can  see  that  I  ate  even  more  of  the  meat  than  you  did."  It  was  agreed,  there- 
fore [ut  ambo  detecarent  instanter],  Tamanoa  stipulating  that  while  thus  engaged 
both  should  keep  their  eyes  tightly  closed.  This  also  was  agreed  to,  but  while  occu- 
pied in  carrying  out  the  conditions  of  the  wager,  Tamanoa  surreptitioiisly  opened  his 
eyes  and  silently  exchanged  [stercus  suum]  tor  that  of  his  adversary.  "Open  eyes!" 
shouted  Ant-eater,  whereupon  both  turned  around  to  see  what  had  happened.  [Felis 
Tigris  animadvertavit  stercus  suuib],  and  was  much  puzzled,  but,  when  he  went  to 
examine  Tamanoas',  he  had  to  admit  at  once  that  his  opponent  had  indeed  eaten 
meat,  and  a  goodly  quantity  of  it,  that  very  morning.  Tiger  was  still  puzzled  over 
[stercore  suo],  and  said  that  a  similar  thing  had  never  happened  before — ^very  likely 
he  jnust  be  sick.  "Sick  indeed  you  are,  and  weak  too,"  retorted  Tamanoa;  "for 
though  my  feet  are  so  clumsy  from  walking  always  on  their  outsidea,  I  am  more  than 
a  match  for  you."  Tiger  was  much  angered  at  this  last  remark,  and  the  result  waa 
that  they  commenced  fighting.  Tiger  made  a  spring  forward  at  the  same  time  that 
Tamanoa  ducked  his  head;  tne  latter,  seizing  Tiger  by  the  ribs,  once  his  hold  was 
secure,  easily  crushed  him — and  Tiger  "soon  dead.'" 

163.  How  Birds  Got  their  Present  Plumage  ' 

Once  upon  a  time  there  was  a  Water  Serpent,  a  huge  creature  with  a  most  brilliant 
skin  of  red,  yellow,  green,  black,  and  white  in  extraordinary  patterns.  He  became 
such  a  terror  to  all  other  living  creatures  that  the  men  and  birds,  who  were  friends 
in  those  days,  combined  forces  to  destroy  him,  and  the  creatxire's  skin  was  promised 
to  the  first  one  who  made  him  come  out  of  the  pool.  But  all  were  afraid  to  tackle 
him  except  Cormorant,*  who,  darting  down  into  the  water,  drove  an  arrow  through 
his  neck — an  arrow  fastened  by  a  string  to  a  tree  on  the  bank,  by  means  of  which  he 
was  finally  drawn  to  land,  where  he  was  skinned.  Cormorant  claimed  the  skin,  and 
the  warriors,  never  thinking  he  would  be  able  to  carry  it  away,  told  him  he  could 
have  it.  He  nodded  to  the  other  birds,  who,  each  seizing  part  of  the  edge,  managed 
to  lift  it  off  the  ground  and  bear  it  to  a  secluded  spot,  where  Cormorant  told  them 
they  could  divide  it  among  themselves,  each  to  take  the  part  that  he  had  just  helped 

1  Von  den  Stelnen  (383)  gives  a  similar  Bakairi  story. 

» So  dreaded  is  the  strength  of  the  ant-eater's  limbs,  that  not  even  an  Indian  will  venture  Into  close 
quarters  with  the  animal. 

'  See  BrB,  173;  oompaie  Brett's  story  in  Sect.  14i- 

<  Im  Thum  (382)  cavils  at  Brett  making  the  attacker  a  cormorant,  which,  he  says,  is  not  a  Guianese 
bird,  and  in  his  version  replaces  It  by  a  duckler  (Plotut  anhinea).    Schomburgk,  however,  speaks  of 
cormorants  (Scharbe),  Halimt  braailianvji  111.,  on  the  Essequibo  (ScH,  i,  293). 
15961° — 30  BTH — 15 15 


226  ANIMISM   AND   FOLK-LOBE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS    [bth.  ann.  30 

to  carry.  Each  bird  carried  his  load  home  on  his  back,  and  ever  since  has  been 
marked  by  the  hues  of  the  section  of  the  serpent's  skin  that  he  carried  happened  to 
bear— parrots  green,  macaws  scarlet  and  gold,  and  so  on.  But  Cormorant  as  his  share 
got  only  the  snake's  head  with  its  somber  tints;  however,  he  remained  content  with 
this. 

163A.  Hunting  is  no  Part  of  "Woman's  Woek  (W) 

While  going  to  her  field  one  morning  an  old  woman  found  a  Deer  fast  asleep  on 
his  back  in  the  pathway.  Returning  to  the  house,  she  got  a  piece  of  an  old  knife  and 
began  sharpening  it.  All  the  grandchildren  were  making  remarks  at  her,  as:  e.  g., 
"Look!  What  is  the  old  woman  sharpening  the  knife  for?  She's  going  hunting." 
"What  do  you  say?"  She  sneeringly  retorted:  "Yes.  I  am  going  hunting.  You 
are  all  too  lazy  to  go,  but  I  am  not:  You  are  not  fit  even  to  hunt,  but  I  am.  I  found 
some  dead  meat  this  morning,  all  spoiUng,  and  I  intend  bringing  it  home."  So 
saying,  she  went  about  her  business,  taking  a  little  granddaiighter  to  keep  her  company 
and  give  help.  When  they  arrived  at  the  spot  where  the  Deer  was  still  lying  on  his 
back,  she  approached  the  beast  and  commenced  jagging  her  knife  under  his  chin 
straight  down  his  neck,  and  so  right  in  the  middle  line  of  his  body.  The  knife  was 
blunt  however,  and  the  old  woman's  arm  weak,  with  the  result  that  at  first  she  did 
hardly  more  than  scratch  the  skin.  But  when  she  tried  to  make  an  incision  lower 
down — [videt  pulchrum  veterem  caprum  esse,  qui  titillatus  in  tanta  delicata  parte 
corporis  eius],  awoke  with  a  surprised  start,  kicked  the  old  woman  to  one  side,  and 
sprang  oft  into  the  bush.  "Damn  you!"  she  cried,  as  she  threw  the  blunt  knife 
after  him. 

When  they  got  home,  the  little  girl  told  her  parents  exactly  what  had  happened' 
to  her  grandmother,  and  how  they  did  laugh' at  her!  It  was  her  first  and  last  attempt 
to  go  hunting  and  do  man's  work. 

16;3B.  How  THE  Tapir  Punished  the  Indian  (W) 

While  traveling  through  the  forest  one  day  an  Indian  came  across  a  party  of  men 
seated,  eating  something  that  smelt  very  savory.  Now,  instead  of  waiting  to  be  asked 
to  partake  of  the  cheer,  our  traveler  roughly  inquired  of  them  what  it  was  that  they 
were  smacking  their  lips  over.  They  told  him  that  it  was  bush-cow  [tapir]  liver, 
and  that  if  he  wanted  some  he  would  have  to  hunt  it  himself.  On  further  questioning, 
they  told  him  exactly  where  he  would  find  a  bush-cow  sleeping,  and  advised  him 
that  the  best  and  quickest  way  to  get  the  liver  was  [manum  cum  cultro  in  ano  inserere 
atque  exscindere],  and  the  silly  old  fool  believed  ihem.  Proceeding  to  the  spot 
indicated  and  finding  the  beast  asleep  [inseruit  cultrum  in  ano] — but,  with  the  tapir 
now  wide  awake,  he  found  it  impossible  to  release  his  arm.  On  rushed  the  animal 
through  thicket,  bush,  and  forest,  dragging  the  miserable  hunter  behind  him.  So 
they  traveled  night  and  day,  only  to  be  released  when  they  found  themselves  on  a 
sheet  of  water.  Here  the  tapir  relieved  himself,  thus  freeing  his  would-be  captor. 
By  the  time  the  man  reached  home  all  the  skin  had  peeled  off  his  arm,  and  when  his 
folk  asked  him  what  had  caused  the  trouble,  he  told  them,  and  they  laughed  at  him. 
He  had  been  punished  for  his  want  of  manners. 

163C.  The  Turtle  and  the  Aruresso  Bird  ^   (W) 

A  woman  had  a  daughter  with  whom  Turtle  and  Aruresso  were  anxious  to  go  court- 
ing, and,  not  knowing  which  to  choose  for  son-in-law,  she  bade  each  cut  a  field. 
Though  the  Bird  left  at  daybreak,  Turtle  would  be  up  and  away  long  before,  and 

1  This  bird  is  tlie  korasiri  of  the  Arawak,  well  known  for  its  habit  of  making  a  "playing-ground  ":  it  is 
said  to  whistle  three  different  tunes  morning  and  afternoon. 


BOTH]  THE   SPTEITS   OF   THE   BUSH  227 

hence  found  greater  favor  with  the  old  woman  who,  more  than  satisfied  with  his 
perseverance  and  industry,  would  supply  him  each  morning  with  heltiri.  She  did 
not  trouble  herself  about  Aruresso.  The  old  mother  at  last  talked  to  both  of  them, 
telling  them  that  she  proposed  taking  a  walk  the  following  morning  to  their  respective 
fields  to  see  what  progress  they  were  making.  Following  Turtle,  she  watched  him 
rolling  here  and  there,  thus  pressing  down  and  smoothing  the  undergrowth  on  a  large 
area  where  the  trees,  old  and  decayed,  had  fallen  helter-skelter  for  ages  past:  as  a 
matter  of  fact  he  had  never  felled  a  single  tree.  It  was  by  starting  away  so  long 
before  daybreak  each  morning  that  he  fooled  the  old  woman  into  thinlriTig  that  he 
must  necessarily  be  working  hard.  She  therefore  went  after  the  Bird  to  see  what 
he  was  about,  and  found  him  in  a  nicely-cleared  space  [i.  e.  his  "playing-ground"]. 
"Well,"  said  she;  "you  shall  be  my  son-in-law,  and  I  won't  bother  about  Turtle 
any  more."  Turning  to  the  latter,  she  added:  "Yes.  You  shall  always  remain 
like  that,  rooting  about  decayed  leaves  and  dead  logs,  and  it  is  in  such  places  that 
Indians  will  come  and  hunt  for  you."  "On  the  other  hand,"  addressing  herself  to 
the  Bird,  "your  nation  will  always  be  cutting  fields,  ever  obtaining  cassava,  and 
making  drink  and  singing  songs." 

163D.  Sisters  Bush-cow  (Tapir)  and  Water-cow  (^Ianati)  (W)  ' 

There  was  once  a  lovely  big  plum  tree,  and  two  sisters  would  come  regularly  and 
pick  the  fruit.  One  day  while  thus  busily  engaged,  a  Bush-cow  [tapir]  came  along, 
so  they  squeezed  some  of  the  fruit  into  a  manicole-palm  spathe  and  offered  it  to  him 
to  drink.  He  drank  it.  Next  day  the  same  thing  happened,  and  so  on  day  by  day, 
until  in  a  very  short  time  he  became  so  tame  that  all  the  girls  had  to  do  when  they 
reached  the  tree  was  just  to  give  a  little  whistle,  when  he  would  put  in  an  appearance 
immediately.  Their  two  brothers,  however,  became  suspicious  of  the  young  women's 
frequent  absences  from  home,  and  setting  a  watch,  saw  them  whistle  for  and  then  feed 
the  creature  with  squeezed  plums.  "What  does  this  mean?  Why  tame  a  wild- 
cow?  "  Realizing  something  to  be  wrong,  they  made  up  their  minds  to  kill  the  beast. 
The  opportunity  was  not  long  in  coming,  and,  leaving  their  sisters  in  the  house  one 
morning,  they  made  straight  for  the  tree,  squeezed  some  of  the  fruit,  and,  imitating 
their  sisters'  whistle,  called  the  Tapir.  So  soon  as  he  came  near,  they  shot  him,  cut 
up  the  meat,  and  brought  it  home.  The  sisters  were  glad  to  see  their  brothers  return 
with  so  much  meat,  and  all  had  their  share  in  eating  it.  By  and  by,  the  girls  repaired 
as  usual  to  the  plum  tree,  squeezed  some  of  the  fruit  into  a  spathe,  and  gave  the  cus- 
tomary whistle — but  no  Bush-cow  came.  They  then  went  home  and  began  to  cry, 
but  they  wouldn't  say  what  they  were  crying  for.  At  last  the  brothers  said:  "Come, 
dry  up  your  tears  and  eat.  There's  plenty  of  meat  in  the  house."  But  they  refused 
to  be  comforted  and  declined  to  eat,  having  now  realized  what  had  happened.  "That 
is  our  pet  whom  you  have  killed,"  they  said.  With  this,  they  left  the  house,  crying 
and  continuing  to  cry  all  the  way  until  they  reached  a  river  bank,  over  which  the 
younger  sister  attempted  to  jump  into  the  water.  But  the  elder  seized  her  by  the 
waist  and  begged  her  not  to  leave,  because  she  would  then  have  to  grieve  alone. 
The  younger  managed,  however,  to  sUp  into  the  water,  and  coming  to  the  surface, 
exclaimed,  "People  will  henceforth  call  me  water-cow."  Then,  diving  three  times, 
she  came  up  finally  entirely  in  the  shape  of  that  creature.^  The  elder  sister  there- 
upon rushed  into  the  Bush,  and  changed  herself  into  a  Bush-cow.  Bush-cow  and 
water-cow  often  meet  nowadays  at  the  waterside  and  have  a  chat.  Of  course  they 
understand  each  other;  haven't  they  both  the  same  talk  [i.  e.  grunt]? 

'  In  connection  with  this  story  see  Sect.  ISi. 

>  Suicide  is  not  unlcnown  among  these  Indians.  I  hate  received  particulars  of  three  cases  of  Arawak 
women  making  away  with  themselves  by  means  of  bitter-cassava  water  owing  to  "unrequited  love." — 
W.  E.  R. 


Chapter  X 

THE  SPIRITS  OF  THE  BUSH 

Associated  with  Particular  Plants 

Derivation  of  Man  from  Plants,  and  vice  versa  {16S-163A);  Association  of  Bush 
Spirits  witii  SUk-cotton  Tree  (164),  Cassava  (165-166),  Maize  (167),  Kofa  (168),  Snake- 
bush  (168 A),  ihe  Whistling  Caladium  (Kanaima),  Blow-tube  Grass  and  Dakini  Tree 
(168B),  Ite  and  Mora  (1680),  and  possibly  with  the  "Tree  of  Life,"  the  "Devil-doer,'' 
SUverbaDi,  Darina,  Hiari,  and  Bamboo  (169).  The  belief  in  Binas  may  be  but  a 
development  of  this  association  of  Bush  Spirits  with  plant-life  (170). 

163.  So  far  as  mankiiid  is  concerned,  their  original  derivation  from 
trees,  trunks,  and  fruits  is  accepted  by  many  of  the  tribes  (Sect.  S7). 
As  to  the  converse  idea — the  transformation  of  human  beings,  or 
their  Spirits,  into  plants  (Sect.  59),  I  can  find  only  two  traces  of  it: 
one,  in  an  Arawak  legend  relative  to  the  discovery  of  the  whip  used 
in  the  maJcuari  dance  (Sect.  75),  and  the  other,  in  the  Yahuna  story 
of  the  Jurupari  ceremony  (Sect.  163A). 

The  First  "Makuari"  Whips  (A) 

There  was  a  family  of  two  sisters  and  two  brothers.  Groing  out  one  day  to  cut 
firewood,  the  former  proceeded  to  the  forest  and  cut  the  timber;  on  splitting  a  log, 
they  found  inside  a  pretty  littie  whip.  After  closely  examining  it,  each  girl  proceeded 
to  make  another  exactly  like  it.  Then  they  proceeded  to  their  provision  field,  put 
up  a  little  banab,  and  hung  inside  it  the  three  whips.  When  they  reached  home 
they  made  some  drink,  two  jugsful  altogether,  one  for  their  two  brothers,  and  one 
for  themselves:  they  took  their  portion  to  the  banab,  where  they  left  it.  On  three 
occasions  they  did  this  [i.  e.  they  made  drinks  and  took  their  own  share  to  the  field]. 
The  brothers,  suspecting  that  something  was  wrong,  and  being  unable  as  brothers 
to  talk  with  their  sisters  on  so  delicate  a  matter,  sent  the  little  hummingbird  to  make 
inquiries.  While  the  girls  were  working  in  the  field,  the  bird  flew  into  the  banab, 
saw  the  jug  of  drink  there,  and  the  three  whips  hanging  up,  and  reported  accordingly. 
The  brothers  thereupon  asked  the  sisters  to  explain  what  they  had  been  doing  in  the 
banab,  and  when  the  latter  said  "Nothing,"  they  reproached  them  for  not  having 
mentioned  anything  about  the  whips,  the  possession  of  which  they  were  then  forced 
to  admit.  The  brothers  then  asked  to  have  a  trial  of  the  whips,  but  this  the  sisteis 
refused:  they  would  not  deliver  their  charge  over  to  anyone.  So  the  brothers  said, 
"Well,  if  you  won't  let  us  touch  them,  you  can  at  all  events  let  us  look  at  you  when 
you  are  sporting  with  them."  No  exception  was  taken  to  thia,  and  the  girls,  making 
some  drink,  enlarged  the  banab  and  widened  the  pathway  leading  up  to  it.  At  the 
entrance  to  the  pathway  they  placed  the  jug  of  drink.  The  brothers  came,  stopped 
to  refresh  themselves  with  its  contents,  began  to  sing,  and  then  proceeded  to  the 
banab,  where,  addressing  their  sisters,  they  asked  them  to  take  down  the  whips  and 
show  their  manner  of  play.  This  the  women  did,  but  it  was  soon  evident  that  they 
knew  neither  how  to  sing,  to  dance,  nor  to  whip  properly  with  them.  Admitting  this, 
they  were  finally  constrained,  after  repeated  entreaties,  to  hand  the  whips  over  to 
228 


BOTH]  THE   SPIBITS   OF   THE   BTTSH  229 

their  brothers,  who  now  showed  them  how  tJie  real  thing  ought  to  be  done.  Farther- 
more,  they  "called"  their  sisters  Kussaro-banna  [=KuiaTia  plait]  and  Koro-botoio 
I=Ite  fiber],  the  elder  and  younger,  respectively,  that  is,  they  transformed  them  into 
Kuiaua  [Bromelia]  thread  and  Ite  fiber,  the  two  materials  out  of  which  the  Arawak 
have  ever  since  made  their  Makuari  whips. 

163A.  In  the  origin  of  the  Jurupari  festival  according  to  the 
Yahuna  Indians  of  the  River  Apaporis  there  is  also  a  conversion  of 
a  human  being  into  a  plant.    This  is  their  story  (KG,  u,  293) : 

A  long  time  ago,  from  out  of  the  great  Water-house,  the  house  of  the  Sun,  came  a 
little  hoy  Mil6maki,  who  sang  so  beautifully  that  everyone  came  from  far  and  near 
to  hear  him;  but  when  they  reached  their  settlements  again,  all  died.  Their  rela- 
tives thereupon  came  and  burned  him  on  a  large  pyre,  but  he  continued  singing  until 
he  died.  Thus  was  his  body  destroyed,  but  his  spirit  went  up  to  heaven.  From  the 
ashes  grew  a  long  green  leaf,  which  visibly  became  greater  and  greater  and  turned  into 
the  first  Paxiuba  palm  [Iriartea  exorria^a],  a  timber  used  for  all  kinds  of  weapons  and 
articles.  The  people  made  big  flutes  of  this  tree,  which  produced  the  same  melodies 
that  Mildmaki  had  sung.  To  honor  Mil6maki  the  men  dance  and  blow  on  these 
flutes  nowadays  when  the  ^•arious  fruits,  as  Inga,  Pupunha  [Guilielma  spaiosa],  Cas- 
tanha,  Umari,  are  ripe,  because  it  was  he  who  created  them  all.  The  women  and 
children  must  not  see  these  flutes:  the  forma:  would  die,  and  the  latter  would  eat 
earth,  become  sick,  and  die. 

164.  Several  examples  are  to  be  met  with  of  Btish  Spirits  being 
associated  with  particular  plants  or  trees.  Perhaps  the  most  inter- 
esting is  that  of  the  silk-cotton  tree  {Bombax  sp.),  the  superstitions 
concerning  which  have  been  incorrectly  surmised  (Br.  369)  as  com- 
municated from  the  negroes  to  the  Indians.  The  earUest  reference 
in  this  connection  that  I  have  been  able  thus  far  to  find  for  it,  in  the 
Gtiianas,  is  by  Stedman  (St,  n,  261),  in  Surinam:  "Perceiving  that 
it  was  their  [negroes']  custom  to  bring  their  offerings  to  the  wild 
cotton-tree  .  .  .  \mder  this  tree  our  gadoman  or  priest  delivers  his 
lectures:  and  for  this  reason  our  common  people  have  so  much 
veneration  for  it,  that  they  will  not  cut  it  down  on  any  accoimt 
whatever."  It  would  be  interesting  to  learn  whether  the  so-called 
fromager  of  the  French  Ivory  Coast  is  identical  with  our  tree.  Certain 
it  is  that  the  records  are  abimdant  as  to  both  Indians  and  negroes 
(AX,  45)  refusing  to  cut  one  down.  -Is  a  matter  of  fact,  however, 
the  superstitions  of  the  Bomhai  were  cberished  in  middle  America 
long  before  the  arrival  of  the  negroes:  the  Mayas  of  Yucatan  spoke 
of  it  as  the  Tree  of  Creation,  etc.,  under  whose  shade  the  spirits  of 
mortals  reposed.  I  know  Arawaks  who  firmly  beheve  that  this  tree 
moves  within  a  circuit  at  midnight  and  returns  to  its  proper  place 
again.  Dance  (57)  states  that  its  guardian  spirit  "walks  round  the 
tree  at  mid-day,  and  at  mid-night."  Brett  (377,  398)  informs  us 
of  an  Arawak  tradition  that  men  and  other  living  creatures  were 
originally  made  out  of  its  bark  and  timber  (Sect.  57).  Women 
have  told  me  that  the  Adda-kuytiha,  in  the  form  of  a  large  bird, 
lives  on  the  buds  (i.  e.  picks  out  the  cotton  to  build  its  nest  with) ; 


230  ANIMISM  AKD  rOLK-LORB   OF  GUIANA  INDIANS   [eth.  ann.  30 

that  the  shedding  of  the  leaves  is  a  sign  that  the  Spirit  has  taken  its 
departure;  and  that  when  the  foliage  is  ^resumed,  the  Spirit  has  re- 
turned. Considering  that  there  are  some  four  or  five  other  deciduous 
trees  known  to  the  Arawaks,  it  would  not  appear  that  their  super- 
stitious regard  for  it  can  be  due  to  the  periodic  shedding  of  the  leaves. 
From  the  fact  of  the  sUk-cotton  tree  being  credited  with  the  power 
of  moving  within  a  circidt  (Sect.  8),  a  separate  sentient  existence 
may  have  been  claimed  for  it;  but  such  a  property  might  equally 
be  due  to  the  particular  medicine-man  or  Bush  Spirit  (Sect.  2^7) 
happeniiig  to  occupy  its  trvmk  or  branches. 

165.  The  cassava  plant  affords  a  very  good  illustration  where  the 
associated  Spirit  remains  distinct,  and  is  given  a  separate  existence,  so 
much  so  that  it  may  be  attacked  by  evil  Spirits  to  prevent  it  dis- 
tributing its  favors,  or  may  be  thanked  and  honored  for  the  benefits 
bestowed  by  it  upon  mankind.  The  Arawaks,  even  at  the  present 
time  in  the  Pomeroon  District,  with  the  building  of  a  house,  or  rather 
at  its  completion,  give  a  party:  when  all  the  guests  are  arrived,  some 
of  the  cassiri,  before  its  distribution  among  the  guests,  is  thrown  by  the 
house-mistress  on  the  uprights;  she  also  places  pieces  of  cassava  at 
the  four  comers  under  the  eaves.  This  is  supposed  to  feed  the 
Yawahus,  or  Spirits  of  the  Bush,  who,  unless  thus  treated,  would 
not  permit  the  Spirit  of  the  Cassava  to  furnish  the  next  crop.  The 
Warrau  Indians  of  the  Moruca  River  had  also  a  special  festival,  or 
thank-offering  to  the  Cassava  Spirit  for  the  bountiful  harvest  which 
it  had  supphed  them  with,  such  festival  taking  the  usual  form  of  a 
drinking  bout  and  a  dance:  they  called  it  the  Aru-hoho  (lit.  cassava 
festival) . 

166.  So  also,  the  first  baking  of  cassava  bread  from  a  new  field 
formerly  was  attended  by  imusual  ceremony.  "  The  cassava,  which 
on  ordinary  occasions  is  scraped  and  washed,  at  the  preparation  for 
the  first  baking,  was  scraped  but  not  washed.  .  .  .  The  juice  ex- 
tracted from  the  grated  cassava  by  means  of  the  matapi  (and  which 
otherwise  would  be  boiled  into  cassirip),  is,  on  this  occasion  .  .  . 
poured  out  on  the  ground  as  a  libation  for  this,  its  first  fruits"  (Da, 
102 — at  Berbice) .  This  is  still  done  on  the  Moruca  River,  the  Arawaks 
here  making  the  juice  from  the  first  cassava  collected  off  the  new 
field,  sprinkling  it  a  few  days  later  here  and  there  over  the  center  of 
the  field;  The  Indians  say  that  this  is  a  gift,  a  sort  of  thanks,  to  the 
Spirit  of  the  Cassava.  On  the  upper  Amazon  a  purely  Indian  festival 
is  celebrated  the  first  week  of  February,  which  is  called  the  Feast  of 
Fruits,  several  kinds  of  wild  fruit  becoming  ripe  at  that  time  (HWB, 
280) :  this  may  have  a  meaning  similar  to  that  ascribed  to  the  cere- 
mony in  connection  with  the  cassava. 

167.  Another  cm-ious  sort,  of  Spirit,  that  of  "the  Rot,"  is  asso- 
ciated with  buck-corn  (maize).    Here  is  an  account  of  it: 


both]  the  spibits  op  the  bush  231 

The  Spikit  of  the  Rot  Saves  the  Young  Woman  (C) 

Two  girls  were  left  in  charge  while  the  remainder  of  the  household  went  to  a  drink- 
party.  The  former  had  been  told  by  their  parents  to  accept  the  invitation,  but  had 
preferred  staying  at  home.  About  sunset  a  Yurokon  emerged  from  a  neighboring 
silk-cotton  tree:  he  had  an  arrow  and  with  it  he  shot  a  parrot.  He  brought  the  bird 
to  the  young  women  and  asked  them  to  cook  it,  and  they,  not  knowing  that  he  was  a 
Bush  Spirit,  were  only  too  ready  to  oblige  him.  After  they  had  eaten  the  bird  and 
he  had  slung  his  hammock,  into  which  he  threw  himself,  Yurokon  called  on  the  younger 
sister  to  join  him,  but  she,  not  feeling  so  inclined,  sent  her  sister  instead.  Later, 
when  all  was  still  and  dark,  the  younger  sister  heard  extraordinary  noises  and  growling 
proceeding  from  their  visitor's  hammock.  [Credens  eos  copulare],  she  paid  no  further 
attention  to  them.  After  a  whUe,  however,  the  clamor  was  even  worse  than  before, 
so,  blowing  up  the  fire,  she  went  over  to  Yurokon's  hammock,  whence  she  saw  blood 
trickling  to  the  groimd.  Looking  inside,  there  was  her  sister  lying  dead.  [Yurokon 
intravit  earn.]  She  now  recognized  the  tribe  to  which  the  man  belonged,  and 
hastened  to  save  herself  from  a  similar  fate.  She  had  a  stack  of  buck-corn,  which 
had  all  beconle  mildewed  and  rotten,  and  in  this  com  she  hid  herself.  To  make 
assurance  doubly  sure,  she  further  warned  the  Spirit  of  the  Rot  that  if  he  allowed 
the  Yurokon  to  come  and  catch  her,  she  would  never  supply  him  with  any  more 
com.  By  very  early  dawn,  Yurokon  had  completed  his  work  of  destruction  with 
the  elder  sister,  and  now  asked  the  Spirit  of  the  Rot  whether  he  had  not  seen  another 
woman  about,  but  this  Spirit  refused  to  answer  the  question,  being  so  busily  engaged 
in  eating  the  com.  Yurokon  therefore  walked  all  about,  looking  everywhere 
for  the  younger  sister,  but  could  not  find  her,  and  now  that  the  day  wat, 
just  breaking,  he  had  to  hurry  back  to  his  home  in  the  silk-cotton  tree.  All 
this  time  the  poor  woman  was  crouching  in  her  hiding-place,  and  it  was  not 
until  midday  when  the  sun  was  shming  brightly,  that  she  dared  emerge. 
Directly  she  did  so,  she  rushed  down  the  pathway  to  meet  her  people,  who  were 
retiuning  from  the  drinking-party,  and,  as  soon  as  she  saw  them,  she  fell  exhausted, 
and  commenced  halloa'ing  and  crying.  "What's  wrong?"  asked  the  mother.  "The 
komaka  [silk-cotton  tree]  Yurokon  has  killed  my  poor  sister,"  was  the  reply.  This 
made  the  mother  say,  "You  ought  to  have  come  with  us  to  the  party,  as  you  were 
told,  instead  of  staying  behind  by  yourselves."  When  at  last  they  reached  home, 
the  parents  picked  all  the  peppers  around,  gathering  twenty  basketsful  of  them. 
They  then  made  a  ring  of  fire  right  round  the  komaka  tree,  which  the  surviving 
daughter  had  no  difficulty  in  pointing  out  to  them,  and  as  soon  as  the  flames  began 
to  blaze,  threw  peppers  into  them.  There  must  have  been  a  big  family  of  Yurokons 
in  that  silk-cotton  tree,  because  as  the  irritating,  pestiferous  smoke  arose,  down  came 
a  lot  of  small  baboons  of  which  the  fire  made  short  shrift.  They  threw  on  more  peppers, 
and  down  fell  a  number  of  bigger  baboons,  and  they  soon  shared  the  same  fate  [Sect. 
24^].  The  parents  now  threw  in  the  last  of  the  peppers,  and  down  scrambled  the 
very  Yurokon  who  had  killed  their  elder  daughter:  they  clubbed  him  to  death,  and 
the  father  said,  "I  am  killing  you  in  payment  for  my  daughter."  They  then  opened 
the  corpse's  belly,  in  which  they  found  woman's  flesh.  The  younger  sister  obeyed 
her  parents  from  that  time  onward. 

168.  Another  tree  which,  according  to  Arawak  beliefs,  has  inti- 
mate association  with  the  Spirit  world,  is  the  Clusia  gravdijlora,  an 
epiphyte,  which  throws  down  straight  aerial  roots  that  finally  fix 
themselves  in  the  ground  below.  Indian  behef  explains  this  pecu- 
harity  by  the  statement  that  the  bunia  bird  roosts  on  the  host, 
whence  it  drops  its  castings  (Sect.  350),  which  are  nothing  more 


232  ANIMISM  AND  FOLK-LOEE  OF  GUIANA  INDIANS  .[bth.  ann.  30 

than  the  aerial  roots  in  question.     The  Arawaks  speak  of  this  epiphyte 
as  the  kofa. 

168A.  Space  must  be  found  here  also  for  mention  of  the  Pomeroon 
Arawak  behef  in  some  intimate  relationship  between  certain  plants 
(known  as  "snake-bush"  to  the  Creoles)  and  venomous  serpents,  the 
poisonous  effects  of  which  they  can  avert.  A  similar  idea  prevailed 
among  the  same  tribe  on  the  Demerara  River: 

The  Indians  advised  that  when  the  snakes  (a  bush-master  and  a  labaria  that  had 
been  killed  and  buried)  were  supposed  to  be  decomposed,  they  should  be  dug  up, 
the  bones  burned,  and  carefully  replaced,  and  the  spot  of  ground  fenced  in.  From 
the  ground  manured  with  the  burned  bones  of  the  snakes,  would  grow  up,  they  said, 
snake-bushes  that  could  be  used  as  antidotes  to  the  virulence  of  snake-bites.  Some 
plants  called  "snake-bush"'  resemble  a  group  of  small  snakes  flattened  laterally, 
standing  upright,  from  twelve  to  twenty  inches,  with  their  tails  planted  in  the  ground. 
[Da,  324.] 

168B.  Among  the  Caribs,  the  masiemo  (i.  e.  kanaima),  Caladium, 
would  seem  at  first  sight  to  possess  quahties  almost  distinctive:  it  is 
a  large-leaf  species  which  I  have  seen  cultivated  at  Carib  settlements 
on  Manawarin  Creek.  Its  pecuUarity  hes  in  its  supposed  power  of 
uttering  a  long  low  whistle,  and  shaking  the  sleeper's  hammock 
with  the  object  of  rousing  him  from  slumber  to  a  sense  of  his  danger 
on  the  near  approach  of  the  human  and  animal  kanaima,  or  blood- 
avenger  (Sect.  320).  The  plant  from  which  the  blow-tube  is  derived 
commonly  grows  in  wet  places,  as  wide  stagnant  marshes,  and  super- 
stition has  stationed  an  Evil  Spirit  to  defend  it,  whence  the  Indians 
have  the  apprehension  that  some  iU  must  bef aU  him  who  ventures  in 
to  procTire  the  reed  (Pnk,  i,  488) .  In  especially  bad  cases  of  sickness 
among  the  Surinam  Caribs  the  chief  remedy  is  the  sap  of  the  Dakini 
tree:  to  obtain  this,  the  piai  has  to  get  the  permission  of  the  Spirit 
of  the  Tree,  and  only  after  many  a  parleying  will  he  cut  an  opening 
to  obtain  it  (AK,  193). 

168C.  The  Ite  Palm  and  the  Mora  Tree   (W) 

In  the  days  of  long  ago  there  was  always  to  be  found  growing  a  Mora  near  an  Ite: 
wherever  one  was  to  be  seen,  there  sure  enough,  close  by,  would  be  found  the  other. 
The  Baboonwould  forage  on  the  Ite  and  eat  of  her  fruit,  and  this  is  just  what  made 
the  Mora  jealous.  In  those  times  the  trees,  like  the  animals,  would  converse  with  one 
another  just  as  people  do;  and  these  two  trees  must  have  been  women,  for  did  they 
not  each  bear  seed?  At  any  rate  the  Ite  said  she  would  leave  the  Mora  and  travel 
eastward,  but  the  Mora  followed  her:  she  wanted  the  Baboon  to  come  and  stay  with 
her.  She  was  very  jealous.  As  they  both  traveled  on  and  on  toward  the  east,  they 
left  some  of  their  seeds  behind:  on  and  on  they  went,  farther  and  farther  east.  As 
the  ground  of  course  gradually  changed  from  dry  bush  to  swamp,  the  Baboon  more  and 
more  preferred  to  feed  on  the  Mora,  whose  branches  were  always  well  above  the  water 
surface,  and  so  finally  left  the  Ite  altogether.  The  Mora  now  at  last  satisfied,  and  with 
no  further  cause  for  jealousy,  remained  where  she  was,  while  the  Ite  traveled  still 
farther  eastward,  stopping  only  when  she  came  to  the  heavy  swamps  of  the  Orinoco. 
And  here  was  too  much  water  for  the  Baboon  to  follow  her.    Hence  it  happens  that  the 


BOTH]  THE   SPIRITS   OF   THE   BUSH  233 

Baboon  is  never  met  with  nowadays  on  the  Ite  palms,  but  alwajrs  on  the  topmost 
branches  of  the  Mora.  All  the  Ite  palms  that  you  see  here  and  there  more  or  less 
isolated  in  this  district  are  stragglers  from  the  original  palm  which  traveled  to  the 
Orinoco.  It  is  only  on  that  mighty  stream  where  you  see  the  real  Ite  palms.  There 
they  yield  starch  and  fruit  and  drink  in  plenty:  the  stragglers  left  behind  here  are 
so  miserable  and  poor  that  it  is  not  worth  our  while  to  cut  them  down. 

169.  Among  remaining  plants  which  may,  perhaps,  be  regarded 
as  associated  more  or  less  intimately  with  Spirits  and  the  hke,  are  the 
"Tree  of  Life,"  the  DevU-doer,  the  SUverballi,  the  Carina,  the  Hiari, 
the  Kanaima  (Sect.  168B),  and  perhaps  the  Bamboo.  A  leaf  of  the 
plant  of  the  "Tree  of  Life"  (BryophyUum  calycinum),  the  Kakuhu- 
adda  of  the  Arawaks,  is  sometimes  suspended  in  the  house,  both  on 
the  Demerara  and  the  Pomeroon,  when  one  of  the  inmates  is  ill. 
Should  the  leaf  germinate,  as  is  its  nature  to  do  under  ordinary  circum- 
stances, it  is  accepted  as  a  sign  that  the  sick  man  will  recover.  But  if 
it  wither,  that  is  an  indication  he  will  die.  The  Devil-doer,  the  uses 
of  which  have  apparently  been  taught  by  the  Indians  to  the  blacks, 
is  a  bush-rope,  called  by  the  latter,  the  Fighting  Stick,  or  Debbil-dooha, 
Debra  dwar,  or  Zebra  dwar.  It  is  said  to  have  the  effect  when  dried, 
pulverized,  and  smoked  with  tobacco,  of  rendering  all  within  the 
influence  of  the  smoke  pugnacious — and  a  row  is  certain:  it  is  used 
to  stimulate  virility,  and  excite  venery  (Da,  286).  So  again,  the 
Indians  are  of  opinion  that  the  scent  of  the  burning  chips  of  the 
Silverballi  (Nectandra  pisi)  makes  people  quarrelsome  (ibid.).  At 
a  certain  season,  the  Darina  has  every  appearance  of  being  dead. 
But  having  shed  its  bark  it  begins  to  revive;  the  new  bark  becomes 
red  like  the  bloodwood  and  thickens ;  new  leaves  spring  forth,  and  the 
tree  resumes  its  beauty.  At  midnight  the  Arawak  Indians  hear  the 
chants  of  the  medicine-man  emanating  from  the  tree  (ibid.).  The 
Hiari  [Hearih],  a  large  tree  with  thick  leaves,  which  bears  a  small 
seed,  is  probably  the  Aiuke  of  the  Akawais.  The  gum,  or  the  inner 
bark,  scraped,  mixed  with  water,  and  given  to  the  sick  will  cause  the 
Spirit  of  the  tree  to  appear  to  him,  and  point  out  the  person  who 
iiiflicted  his  illness  upon  him :  thrown  into  the  fire,  it  stupefies  all  who 
inhale  its  fumes  (Da,  2S5).  The  smoke  of  the  wood  when  biirning 
is  fatal  to  all  kinds  of  animals  (Bol,  25S).  The  Pomeroon  Arawaks 
believe  that  if  the  leaves  fall  into  the  river  from  an  overhanging  tree, 
sickness  will  fall  upon  the  people  farther  down  the  stream.  The 
same  folk  believe  that  the  Bamboo  flowers  and  seeds  only  during 
the  night,  which  certainly  accounts  for  the  fructification  not  being 
seen,  if  for  nothing  else :  any  alleged  Indian  superstition  concerning 
this  palm  must  be  coimteracted  of  course  by  the  fact  that  it  is  an 
introduced  plant.  The  ability  of  the  house-posts  to  talk  (Sect.  16) 
may  be  traces  of  a  Spirit  originally  associated  with  the  timber. 

170.  I  am  very  strongly  inclined  to  regard  all  the  (vegetal)  attrac- 
tion— charms,  or  binas,  used  in  hunting  (Sect.  233)  or  love-making 


234  ANIMISM  AND  FOLK-LOKE  OF  GUIANA  INDIANS   [bth.  ANN.  30 

(Sect.  S37),  and  otherwise,  as  survivals  of  an  original  belief  in  plants 
possessing  associated  Spirits;  while  the  presence  of  the  originally 
associated  Spirit  has  been  lost  sight  of,  and  more  or  less  forgotten, 
its  attributes,  properties,  and  powers  have  been  retained.  It  will  be 
remembered  that  all  such  binas  have  an  exceptional  source  of  origin — 
the  calcined  bones  of  a  snake  (Sect!  235),  and  in  this  connection  it  is  no 
less  interesting  to  note  that  the  Haiari  root  (Lonchocarpus  sp.),  fish- 
poison,  which  can  equally  be  regarded  as  an  attraction-charm, 
should  also  possess  animal  (with  its  contained  spirit)  relationships, 
in  that  it  has  been  quickened  in  human  blood.  I  here  paraphrase 
the  Legend  of  the  Haiari  Root,  given  by  Brett  (BrB,  172) : 

An  old  fisherman  noticed  that  when  his  boy  accompanied  him,  and  swam  about 
in  the  river,  there  the  fishes  would  die,  and  yet  were  quite  good  to  eat.  So  he  made  a 
point  of  making  the  lad  bathe  every  day.  But  the  fish  were  determined  upon  putting 
an  end  to  this.  Accordingly  one  day  when  the  lad,  after  a  swim,  was  lying  basking  in 
the  sun,  those  fish  which  were  possessed  of  spines,  and  especially  the  sting-ray,  sprang 
quickly  up  at  him  and  pricked  him.  The  lad  died  of  his  wounds,  but  before  dying 
told  his  father  to  watch  for  the  strange  plants  that  would  spring  up  from  the  ground  in 
those  spots  where  his  blood  had  fallen.    The  father  did  so,  and  found  the  haiari. 


Chaptek  XI 
THE  SPIRITS  OF  THE  MOUNTAIN 

Their  presence  due  mainly  to:  Peculiarities  in  geological  conformation,  markings, 
etc.  {171),  for  example,  in  legend  of  Kaieteur  Fall  {172),  Rock-engravings  (17S); 
Actual  Transformation  of  Sentient  Beings  into  rocks  and  stones  {174);  Site  of  some 
long-past  remarkable  occurrence  {175-176). 

171.  The  belief  on  the  part  of  the  Indians  in  the  presence  of  Moun- 
tain Spirits  in  certain  locahties  would  seem  to  have  been  due  in  large 
measure  to  one  or  another  of  three  sets  of  causes:  peculiarities  in 
conformation,  marking,  position,  and  other  features  of  the  rocks 
(on  the  principle  of  suiting  a  picture  to  the  frame) ;  the  supposed 
transformation  of  the  person  or  animal  into  stone;  or  the  association 
of  the  locahty  with  some  remarkable  event  that  took  place  in  the 
long-ago. 

There  are  an  endless  number  and  variety  of  Spirits  connected  with 
mountains,  precipices,  rocks,  cataracts,  etc.  (cf.  Sect.  68).  South  of 
the  Takutu  River  is  a  mountain  chain  taking  its  name  from  a  hill 
resembling  a  crescent  in  the  distance,  whence  the  Wapisianas  have 
compared  it  to  the  moon  (Kaira  in  their  language),  and  designating  it 
in  consequence  Kai-irite,  or  Mountains  of  the  Moon  (ScT,  48) .  Now 
all  this  country  in  Schomburgk's  time  was  terra  incognita  to  both 
Brazilians  and  Indians,  and  hence,  as  might  have  been  expected,  and 
as  he  tells  us,  "the  Indian  banishes  all  evil  spirits 'to  this  region, 
while  the  Brazilian  considers  it  the  abode  of  wild  Indians  who  massacre 
any  person  foolhardy  enough  to  come  within  their  precincts."  So 
extraordinarily  has  nature  molded  her  mountain  forms  in  different 
parts  of  the  Guianas,  that  there  are  seldom  wanting  resemblances, 
comparatively  striking,  to  common  everyday  objects.  I  can  quite 
ssrmpathize  with  Schomburgk  when  he  so  much  regretted  that  the 
little  knowledge  which  he  possessed  of  the  Makusi  language  did  not 
permit  him  to  understand  some  of  the  many  wonderful  stories  the 
Indians  had  to  tell  him  of  every  stone  they  met  on  the  road  that  was 
of  more  than  ordinary  size  or  fantastically  shaped  by  nature  (ScF, 
199).  Along  the  valley  of  the  Unamara,  a  very  good  example  is 
Mara-etshiba,  the  highest  mountain,  where  the  bulgmg  out  in  the 
middle  of  this  mass  of  rock  has  been  identified  with  the  maraka. 
Another  is  Mount  Canu-yeh-piapa  (Ht.  "guava-tree  stump"),  while 
a  third  is  Mount  Pur6-piapa  ("headless  tree")  (ScF,  197).  Else- 
where, there  is  Mount  Pakaraima,  a  singular  isolated  mountain 
which  from  its  figure  "has  been  called  the  Pakara  or  Pakal,  meaning 

235 


236  ANIMISM  AND  FOLK-LOSE  OF  GUIANA  INDIANS   [bth.  ann.  30 

a  basket"  (ScF,  221).  Mount  Sororieng,  the  "swallows'  nest,"  an 
object  of  mucli  dread  to  the  superstitious,  is  another  good  instance 
"  (BW,  177).  The  Takwiari  offset  of  the  Twasinkie  Mountains,  Esse- 
quibo,  derives  its  Carib  name  from  a  remarkable  pile  of  large  granite 
bowlders  so  placed  as  to  resemble  a  water-jar,  called  Comuti  by  the 
Arawak  Indians,  and  by  this  name  they  are  more  commonly  known 
(ScR,  I,  328).  Ayangcanna  Mountain  can  be  seen  in  the  distance 
from  the  upper  Mazaruni,  forming  a  most  singular  picture.  The 
word  means  "hce-searchers,"  this  disagreeable  name  being  bestowed 
on  account  of  a  row  of  huge  pointed  rocks  on  the  crest,  which  are 
sharply  defined  against  the  sky,  and  to  the  Indian  eye  resemble  a 
row  of  women  seated  one  behind  the  other,  searching  each  other'p 
head  for  vermin,  a  custom  very  prevalent  among  all  Guiana  tribes 
(Bro,  390).  It  must  be  admitted  that  such  fancied  resemblances  are 
not  always  too  clear  to  European  eyes.  Clear  or  not,  however,  once 
the  resemblance  admitted,  then  follow  the  explanation  and  the 
"padding,"  the  pointing  of  the  so-called  moral  to  adorn  the  tale. 
Wayaca-piapa  Mountain,  northwest  of  Roraima,  is  the  "felled  tree" 
which,  as  the  Indians  say,  the  Spirit  Makonaima  cut  down  during- 
his  journey  through  these  parts.  On  the  Mazaruni,  near  Masanassa 
village,  relates  Boddam-Whetham :  "We  passed  a  peculiar  rock  in 
the  middle  of  the  river  somewhat  resembling  a  htmaan  figure:  the 
Indians  thought  it  was  a  river-god  watching  for  pacu"  (BW,  179). 
On  some  granite  blocks,  above  the  Waraputa  Rapids,  Essequibo 
River,  "I  found,"  says  Schomburgk,  "two  impressions  of  a  man's 
foot,  as  if  he  had  sprung  from  one  rock  to  the  other.  The  imprint 
of  each  foot,  even  to  that  of  the  five  toes,  was  really  striking.  The 
Indians  told  us  that  these  were  the  tracks  which  the  Great  Spirit  had 
left  behind  when  he  took  his  departure  along  this  route  from  among 
their  forefathers  with  whom  he  used  to  live"  (ScR,  i,  326). 

In  passing  the  Caro-miring  [branch  oi  the  upper  Mazaruni]  the  guide  informed  us 
that  when  high  it  is  navigable  for  canoes  for  half  a  day's  journey  up,  to  the  foot  of  a 
high  fall,  at  which  there  is  a  large  sand-beach,  marked  with  mysterious  footprints 
resembling  those  made  by  the  human  foot.  The  sand  also  is  thrown  up  as  if  children 
had  been  playing  there.  If  the  Indians  who  visit  the  spot  trample  down  these  heaps, 
and  go  away  for  a  short  time,  on  their  return  they  find  them  there  again  as  before. 
The  Indians  believe  that  wild  men  live  near  the  spot,  but  have  never  succeeded  in 
seeing  them.     [Bro,  385.] 

The  torrential  streams  which  so  suddenly  gush  down  from  the 
heights  of  Roraima  are  but  the  sorrowful  tears  of  the  Mother  of  Pia 
and  Makonaima — she  who  had  been  left  behind  on  top  of  this  moun- 
tain by  the  former  (Da,  342).  At  least  that  is  what  the  Makusis 
affirm.  Some  people  say  that  over  the  tops  of  Roraima  and  Kukenam 
are  spread  seas  fDled  with  all  kinds  of  fish,  especially  dolphins,  and 
continually  circlsd  by  gigantic  white  eagles,  which  act  as  perpetual 
watchmen  (ScR,  ii,  265). 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN   ETHNOLOGY 


THIRTIETH  ANNUAL  REPORT     PLATE  4 


THE    KAIETEUR    FALL 

(From  D.  photograph  by  W.  11.  McTurk) 


BOTH]  THE  SPIKITS  OF   THE  MOUNTAIN  237 

172.  Another  example  of  this  series  of  cases  is  the  legend  relative 
to  the  celebrated  Kaieteur,Fall  (pi.  4),  which  I  give  here  in  the  words 
of  Barrington  Brown  (Bro,  214),  the  discoverer  of  this  wonder-spot: 

-Once  upon  a  time  there  was  a  large  village  above  the  fall,  situated  on  the  little 
savanna,  amongst  the  inhabitants  of  which  was  an  old  Indian,  who  had  arrived  at 
that  period  of  human  existence,  when  his  life  had  become  a  burden  to  himself  and  a 
trouble  to  his  relatives.  Amongst  other  duties,  there  devolved  upon  his  near  rela- 
tions the  tedious  one  o!  extracting  the  jiggers  from  his  toes  which  there  accumulated 
day  by  day.  These  duties  becoming  irksome  at  last,  it  was  arranged  that  the  old 
man  should  be  assisted  on  his  way  to  his  long  home,  that  spirit  land  hdng  two-days' 
journey  beyond  the  setting  sun.  He  was  accordingly  transferred,  with  his  pegall  of 
worldly  goods,  from  his  house  to  a  woodskin  on  the  river  above  the  head  of  the  great 
fall,  and  launched  forth  upon  the  stream.  The  silent  flood  bore  him  to  its  brink, 
where  the  rushing  waters  received  him  in  their  deadly  grasp,  bearing  his  enfeebled 
body  down  to  its  watery  grave  in  the  basin  below.  Not  long  after,  strange  to  relate, 
his  woodskin  appeared  in  the  form  of  a  pointed  rock,  which  to  this  day  is  seen  not 
far  from  our  lower  barometer  station;  while  on  the  sloping  mass  of  talus  to  the  west  of 
the  basin,  a  huge  square  rock  is  said  to  be  his  petrified  pegall  or  canister.  Thus  has 
the  fall  been  named  Kaieteur  in  memory  of  the  victim  of  this  tragic  event. 

173.  The  remarkable  petroglyphs,  scattered  through  the  Guianas, 
to  which  so  many  travelers  have  drawn  attention,  are  in  the  same 
way  credited  with  a  supernatural  origin.  Thus  Schomburgk  rslates, 
when  at  the  Waraputa  Rapids:  "I  was  most  anxious  to  carry  away 
part  of  one  of  the  rocks  .  .  .  and  neither  threats  nor  promises  could 
induce  any  of  our  Indians  to  strike  a  blow  against  these  monuments 
of  their  ancestors'  skill  and  superiority.  They  ascribe  them  to  the 
Great  Spirit,  and  their  existence  was  known  to  all  the  tribes  met  with. 
The  greatest  uneasiness  was  depicted  upon  the  faces  of  our  poor  crew; 
in  the  very  abode  of  the  Spirits,  they  momentarily  expected  to  see 
fire  descend  to  punish  our  temerity"  (ScG,  275).  The  Piapocos  of 
the  lower  Guaviar  River  ascribe  such  rock-gravings  to  their  Mami- 
naimis,  or  Water  Spirits  (Cr,  525,  529) .  The  amount  of  intelligence 
displayed  by  the  expression  of  such  a  behef  was  however,  within  com- 
paratively recent  times,  paralleled  by  that  of  a  European  Power,  for 
on  the  Montagne  d' Argent  on  the  coast  between  Cayenne  and  the 
River  Oyapock,  the  rock-carvings  were  claimed  by  the  Portuguese 
to  represent  the  coat-of-arms  of  Charles  V  when  they  had  a  dispute 
with  the  French  over  their  boundary  line  (Cr,  145). 

174.  The  existence  has  been  shown  (Sect.  58)  of  a  belief  in  the 
origin  of  human  and  animal  life  from  rocks  or  stones  and  in  the  trans- 
formation of  such  sentient  beings  into  the  inorganic  material  similar  to 
that  from  which  they  have  sprung.  This  transformation  is  regarded 
not  only  as  a  natural  departure  from  the  normal  covirse  of  events,  but 
also  in  the  light  of  a  pimishment  (Sect.  67).  At  Aramayka,  a  settle- 
ment on  the  Mazaruni,  close  to  Karamang  River,  the  cliffs  of  Mara- 
biacru  become  visible  to  the  height  of  about  one  thousand  feet,  with 
perpendicular  faces  on  the  north.     A  remarkable  detached  peaked 


238  ANIMISM  AND  FOLK-LOEE  OF  GUIANA  INDIANS   [eth.  ANN.  SO 

rock  on  the  western  face  of  the  cliffs  is  called  the  Caribisce.  The 
legend  says  it  is  a  man  of  that  nation  turned  into  stone  for  attempting 
to  scale  the  cliff  (HiA,  32).  The  Nation  of  Stone-adzes,  where  all  the 
people  are  really  stones,  has  been  mentioned  (Sect.  158).  But  how- 
ever produced,  these  inorganic  objects  with  human  instincts,  powers, 
and  ideas,  so  to  speak,  aU  play  a  more  or  less  important  part  on  the 
world's  stage.  Thus,  a  rugged  rock,  a  real  good,  friend,  comes  and 
quells  the  fountain  which  threatens  to  OTerwhelm  the  nation  (BrB, 
106).  In  those  cases  in  which  the  transformation  is  the  result  of 
pimishment  it  might  only  be  expected  that  the  propensities  of  such 
rocks  and  stones  would  be  directed  into  channels  other  than  good. 
Perhaps  it  was  some  idea  similar  to  this  which  led  to  the  loss  of 
Schomburgk's  geological  specimens:  "One  of  the  Indian  carriers 
said  he  had  lost  my  geological  specimens :  my  brother  had  previously 
warned  me  of  this — the  Indian  thinks  it  something  evil,  and  wUl 
secretly  throw  it  away"  (ScR,  i,  433).  The  same  may  possibly  be 
said  of  the  following:  Above  the  cataracts  of  the  River  Demerary 
,  are  abvmdance  of  red  and  white  agates,  which  remain  untouched  by 
the  natives,  who  avoid  them  from  a  principle  of  superstitious  venera- 
tion) as  they  are  dedicated  to  the  service  of  their  magical  invocations 
(Ba,  21).  Probably  some  idea  of  this  nature  may  form  the  basis  of 
the  practice  noted  by  BroAvn,  in  the  Cotinga  District,  in  connection 
with  certain  small  artificial  stone-heaps  on  the  sides  of  the  paths 
over  the  Savannah  Mountains.  These  were  3  or  4  feet  in  height. 
The  Indians  with  him,  in  passing,  had  added  to  the  heaps  by  dropping 
on  them  stones  picked  up  near  by;  he  could  never  learn  their  object 
in  so  doing,  for  when  questioned  about  it,  they  only  laughed  (Bro, 
276).  (In  the  Gran  Chaco,  the  Indians,  on  going  over  a  pass,  will 
place  a  stone  on  the  ground,  so  that  they  will  not  get  tired  on  the 
way  (Nor,  12).) 

175.  Again,  just  as  ia  the  Old  World,  the  scene  of  some  tragedy 
apparition,  or.  of  any  untoward  event— real  or  imaginary — may 
ultimately  assume  by  the  addition  of  tale  and  fable  a  halo  of  reputed 
sanctity,  so  may  many  a  local  feature  of  natural  scenery  in  the 
Guianas  constitute  the  landmark  as  it  were  of  some  notable  occur- 
rence— a  death,  a  bloody  feud,  the  appearance  perhaps  of  some 
extraordinary  animal — with  the  result  that  such  a  spot  becomes 
weird  and  eerie,  and  all  kinds  of  fanciful  stories  are  told  in  connection 
with  its  immediate  neighborhood.  The  Indians  have  a  tradition 
that  the  cliffs,  hillocks,  and  other  places,  about  a  mUe  from  Kayiwa  on 
the  Corentyne  are  inhabited  by  a  large  snake,  which  from  time  to  time 
goes  to  drink  the  water  of  the  river,  and  that  its  passage  thither  has 
deprived  the  cliffs  of  vegetation  (ScC,  289).  On  a  low  hill  above  the 
Waiquah  River,  a  branch  of  the  Cotinga,  Barrington  Brown  "ob- 


BOTH]  THE   SPIBITS  OF   THE   MOUNTAIN  239 

served  a  huge  artificial  mound  of  earth  and  small  stones,  which  the 
guide  said  was  the  grave  of  Makunaima's  brother.  It  would  seem  that 
the  Great  Spirit  is  a  dweller  in  this  region,  for  an  isolated  rocky  moun- 
tain, seen  from  the  Cotinga  lower  down,  at  the  head  of  the  Mauitzie 
River,  is  called  Makunaima-outa,  which  means  the  'Great  Spirit's 
House'"  (Bro,276).  In  the  Pakaraima  Mountains  there  is  a  singular 
rockcalled  by  the  Makusis  Toupanaghoe,  from  its  resemblance  to  ahand. 
The  Indians  make  it  the  seat  of  a  demon  and  pass  it  imder  fear  and 
trembling  (ScG,  256).  At  the  Merume  escarpment,  upper  Mazaruni, 
says  Brown, ' '  the  Indians  begged  my  men  not  to  roast  salt  fish  on  the 
embers,  fearing  thereby  to  rouse  the  ire  of  a  large  eagle  and  camoodie 
snake,  which  they  said  lived  on  the  moimtain  side,  and  would  show 
their  displeasure  by  causing  more  rain  to  fall"  (Bro,  399).  According 
to  the  tale  told  by  a  medicine-man.  Mount  Roraima  was  guarded  by 
an  enormous  camudi,  which  could  entwine  a  hundred  people  in  its 
folds.  He  himself  had  once  approached  its  den  and  had  seen  demons 
running  about  as  numerous  as  quails  (BW,  225).  Another  Indian 
in  the  same  neighborhood  objected  to  camping  near  what  he  believed 
to  be  the  cave  of  a  celebrated  "water-mama,"  near  which  it  was 
dangerous  to  sleep  (BW,  210). 

176.  Sometimes  the  facts  of  the  original  occurrence  have  been  lost 
sight  of  and  only  a  memory  remains,  but  this  memory  is  grafted  on 
the  minds  of  the  Indians  apparently  in  the  form  of  a  Spirit,  if  we  are 
to  judge  by  the  procedures  adopted  on  their  visiting  such  localities — 
these  must  neither  be  approached  too  closely,  nor  pointed  to,  and 
sometimes  not  even  looked  at,  or  spoken  of.  Although  it  is  per- 
missible to  single  out  a  person  by  a  nod  with  the  head,  to  point  the 
finger  at  a  fellow-creature  is  to  offer  him  as  serious  an  affront  as  it 
would  be  to  step  over  him  when  he  is  lying  on  the  ground  (Sect.  72); 
in  the  latter  case  he  would  tell  you  that  he  is  not  dead  yet,  and  that 
you  must  wait  until  he  is.  To  point  the  finger  at  a  Spirit  must 
necessarily  be  a  much  more  serious  matter.  We  have  the  Old  Man's 
Rock  in  the  Essequibo,  which  a  murdered  buckeen  continually 
haunts,  and  at  which  it  is  dangerous  to  point  the  finger  (A,  i,  93). 
So  also,  there  is  a  large  bare  rock  (the  Negro  Cap)  standing  with  its 
head  about  six  feet  above  the  water,  close  to  the  Three  Brothers 
Islands,  in  the  same  river,  concerning  which  the  natives  entertain  a 
most  curious  superstition.  They  believe  that  if  any  individual 
points  at  this  rock  a  heavy  storm  will  immediately  overtake  him  for 
his  audacity  (StC,  ii,  37).  The  dangers  consequent  upon  talking 
about  Spirits  have  already  been  dealt  with  (Sect.  1^4))  hence  the 
following  allusion  from  im  Thurn  is  of  interest:  "In  very  dry  seasons, 
when  the  water  in  the  riA^ers  is  low,  the  rocks  in  their  beds  are  seen  to 
have  a  curious  glazed,  vitrified  and  black  appearance,  due  probably 


240  ANIMISM  AND  FOLK-LORE   OP  GUIANA  INDIANS   [bth.ann.30 

to  deposits  of  iron  and  manganese.  Whenever  I  questioned  the 
Indians  about  these  rocks,  I  was  at  once  silenced  by  the  assertion 
that  any  allusion  to  their  appearance  would  vex  these  rocks  and 
cause  them  to  send  misfortune"  (IT,  354).  The  most  curious,  how- 
ever, of  all  the  procedures  indicative  of  a  Spirit's  presence  somewhere 
in  the  immediate  neighborhood  is  that  which  concerns  the  sense  of 
sight;  several  examples  of  this  temporary  occlusion  of  vision  are 
-recorded  elsewhere  (Sect.  i52). 


Chapteb  xn 

THE  SPIRITS  OF  THE  WATER 

Names  and  general  appearance:  Anthropomorphic  (777) ;  partly  human,  partly  ani- 
mal {178);  Zoomorphic,  as  porpoise,  manati,  macaw  (i79),  snake  {180),  big  fish,  Omar 
{181-182) ;  derived  from  men  or  animals  {183) ;  kindly  disposed  on  the  whole — they 
gave  man  his  water-jug  and  potato  {184),  the  rattle  and  tobacco  {185);  of  an  amorous 
disposition  {186-187),  with  strong  likings  for  menstruating  women  {188-189) ;  share,  with 
Bush  Spirits,  the  responsibility  for  sickness,  accident,  and  death  (190) ;  responsible 
also  for  the  Tidal  Wave  {191);  they  object  to  mention  of  their  names  and  antecedents 
{191);  to  a  pot-spoon  being  washed  outside  the  traveling  boat  {19S);  and  woe  betide 
the  voyager  if  he  dares  to  utter  certain  forbidden  words  {194)- 

177.  The  Water  Spirits,  whether  anthropomorphic  or  zoomorphic, 
are  known  as  Ori-yu  or  Orehu  (Arawak),  Ho-ardnni  (Warrau),  Oko- 
yumo    (Carib),   etc.     The   Warraus,  especially   a  swamp-inhabiting 
tribe,  seem  to  have  made  several  distinctions  in  their  Spirits:    they 
had  their  Ahdba,  Ho-inarau  or  Ho-ardnni,  and  Xaba-rau  or  Xaba- 
ranni.     The  Ahtiba  is  the  "Fish-mamma,"  the  chief  of  all  the  fish — 
one  male  and  one  female.     The  two  hve  in  imdergroimd  water;  their 
heads  are  hke  those  of  people,  but  their  bodies  resemble  those  of 
fish  though  they  are  provided  with  all  the  different  kinds  of  feet 
belonging  to  land  animals.     They  work  evil  on  mankind ;  when  ship- 
wreck takes  place  they  eat  the  bodies.    The  Ho-inarau  and  Xaba- 
rau  represent  the  Water  Spirits  of  the  sea  and  the  rivers,  respec- 
tively;   they   are  sometimes  hke  people,  sometimes  Uke  fish,  and 
were  once  good  and  kind,  but  the  Warraus  have  made  them  bad. 
Indeed,  there  was  a  time  when  these  Water  People  used  to  hve  in 
amity  and  friendship  with  the  Land  People.     There  are  two  reasons 
for  the  termination  of  this  ideal  state  of  existence.    The  Warraus 
used  to  exchange  wives  with  them  in  those  days,  that  is,  a  wife  would 
be  taken  as  required  alternately  from  the  one  and  the  other  tribe 
(see  Sect.  190).    The  Warrau  supply  ran  short,  however,  and  the 
Water  Spirits  accordingly  became  vexed  and  angered  with  them. 
The  second  alleged  reason  is  that  the  Warraus  insisted  on  the  isolation 
of  the  women  at  their  menstrual  periods,  a  practice  to  which  the 
Water  Spirits  were  unaccustomed  and  strongly  objected  (Sect.  190). 
Though  some  of  the  Water  Spirits  have  been  repeatedly  described 
by  certain  authors  as  the  Water-mamma,  they  have  nothing  whatever 
to  do  with  the  African-Creole  superstition  represented  under  that 
designation.     Still  less  have  they  necessarily  any  connection  with 
the  water-cow  or  manati  (the  Km-u-moro  of  the  Arawaks),  or  with 
the  water-camudi  (the  madre  del  agua  of  the  old  Spanish  authors), 

15961° — 30BTH— 15 16  241 


242  ANIMISM  AND  FOLK-LOBE   OP  GUIANA  INDIANS   [eth.  ann.  30 

except  of  course  in  the  possibility  that  the  physical  attributes  and 
peculiarities  of  these  and  other  huge  creatures  have  had  to  be 
accounted  for  in  the  Indian  cosmogony.  The  natives  of  the  Amazons 
country  have  their  mai  d'agoa — ^Mother  or  Spirit  of  the  Water — ^in 
the  shape  of  a  water  serpent  said  to  be  many  score  fathoms  in  length, 
a  monster  doubtless  suggested  by  the  occasional  appearance  of  the 
anaconda  {Eunectes  murinus),  which  assumes  a  great  variety  of 
forms  (HWB,  236).  One  of  the  many  mysterious  tales  told  of  the 
Bouto,  as  the  large  dolphin  of  the  Amazons  is  called,  "was  to, the 
effect  that  a  Bouto  once  had  the  habit  of  assuming  the  shape  of  a 
beautiful  woman,  with  hair  hanging  loose  to  her  heels,  and  walking 
ashore  at  night  in  the  streets  of  Ega  to  entice  the  young  men  down  to 
the  water.  If  anyone  was  so  much  smitten  as  to  follow  her  to  the 
water-side,  she  grasped  her  victim  round  the  waist  and  plunged 
beneath  the  waves  with  a  triumphant  cry"  (HWB,  309). 

The  accounts  of  these  Water  Folk  vary  a  great  deal,  but  I  believe 
the  following  represents  the  consensus  of  Arawak  opinion.  The 
Oriyus  always  Hve  in  the  water  and  one  at  least  accompanies  every 
corial.  If  an  accident  takes  place  the  Spirit  is  blamed  for  it.  These 
Spirits  may  appear  in  human  shape,  impersonating  both  sexes. 
The  female  sometimes  can  be  seen  bathing  on  the  banks  of  a  stream, 
or  combing  her  long  hair  with  a  silver  comb,  which  she  occasionally 
forgets  and  leaves  behind  in  her  hurry  to  return  to  the  water  when 
suddenly  surprised.      ' 

178.  Oriyu  sometimes  splashes  and  tramples  the  water  like  a  horse 
where  horses  are  known  not  to  exist;  Brett  even  goes  so  far  as  to  teU 
us  that  "she  sometimes  presents  herself  above  the  water  with  the 
head  of  a  horse  or  other  animal  as  it  may  suit  her  fancy,  or  the  object 
she  has  in  view"  (Br,  367).  On  the  other  hand,  I  have  often  heard 
her  or  him  described  by  Warraus  as  having  a  fish's  head.  Brett  as  a 
matter  of  fact  always  speaks  of  Oriyu  as  a  female.  Of  remaining 
Water  People  those  mentioned  by  im  Thurn  as  the  Huroni  (cf.  the 
Warrau  term  Ho-ardnni,  Water  Spirits  in  general),  "a  tribe  of 
Indians  living  beyond  the  Pakaraima  [mountains],  who  are  men 
by  night,  but  fish  by  day,"  etc.  (IT,  384),  will  doubtless  remind 
the  reader  strongly  of  the  Huri  Fish  story  (Sect.  152).  People  may 
actually  be  transformed  into  fish  (Sect.  115).  The  Piapocos  of  the 
lower  Guaviar,  a  branch  of  the  Orinoco,  have  abelief  in  Evil  Spirits 
who  live  by  day  at  the  bottom  of  the  water,  but  emerge  at  night, 
when  they  walk  about,  screaming  like  little  children:  they  caU  these 
Spirits  Mami-naimis,  and  consider  that  the  various  rock-carvings  are 
their  handiwork  (Cr,  525,  529).  Endowed  with  somewhat  similar 
habits  there  must  be  included  here  the  Water  People  mentioned  by 
Brown  (Bro,  247),  who  apparently  received  his  information  from  the 
Tarumas  of  the  upper  Essequibo,  and  by  Cr^vaux  (274)  who  de- 


BOTH]  THE   SPIRITS  OF   THE   WATER  243 

rived  his  from  the  Indians  of  the  upper  Parou,  in  the  far  eastern 
Guianas.  The  former  tells  us  that  the  Toonahyannas,  or  Water 
People,  are  said  to  hve  more  to  the  south,  near  the  headwaters  of  the 
Trombetas  River  (in  Brazil).  These  have  ponds  encircled  by- 
stockades,  to  which  they  retire  for  the  night,  sleeping  with  their 
bodies  submerged.  The  latter  authority  states  that  "on  a  march  of 
four  days  to  the  westward,  we  would  meet  some  very  bad  Indians 
whom  it  would  be  impossible  to  take  by  surprise  because  they  plunged 
in  a  stream  called  by  the  same  name  (Parou)  as  that  which  we  were 
now  on.  .  .  .  Let  us  note  in  passing  that  tooTia signifies  'water'  not 
only  amongst  the  Taruma,  but  also  in  the  language  of  the  Trios, 
Roucouyennes,  Apalai,  Carijonas:  the  Caribs  of  the  Antilles  call 
water  tone."  Perhaps  these  Water  People  were  imdergoiog  a  gradual 
transformation  before  reaching  the  final  change  with  advancing 
European  civilization,  after  the  style  of  the  Partamonas  at  Waipah 
village  on  the  Ireng,  who  stated  that  it  was  currently  reported  among 
the  surrounding  inhabitants  that  now  that  a  white  man  had  come 
among  them,  their  country  would  sink  under  water  (Bro,  283). 

179.  When  zoomorphic  the  Water  Spirit  may  take  on  the  form  of 
a  porpoise,  manati  (Sect.  183),  macaw,  snake,  or  fish.  Thus,  the 
Pomeroon  Arawaks  believe  in  the  kassi-kuyuha,  a  white  or  a  black 
variety  of  porpoise:  the  latter  will  hunt  and  injure  a  person  who 
happens  to  fall  into  the  water,  whereas  the  white  species  will  save  one 
from  drowning  and  carry  him  to  shore.  All  that  one  has  to  do  is 
to  jump  on  the  Spirit's  back — it  will  do  the  rest  and  will  always  help 
anyone  who  is  not  afraid  of  it.  Caroquia,  on  the  Demerara  River, 
is  a  place  avoided  by  the  Indians:  Water-m&mmas  in  this  place 
take  the  form  of  huge  scarlet  macaws,  which  rise  out  of  the  river 
and  drag  them  beneath  the  water,  woodskins  and  all  (Ki,  179).  On 
the  Moruca  River  an  old  Warrau  piai  friend  of  mine  told  me  that 
it  is  the  macaw  who  tells  the  Ho-ar&nni  to  come  and  upset  the  canoe, 
as  well  as  to  destroy  the  occupants:  the  bird  itself  may  also  assist 
directly  in  the  work  of  destruction. 

180.  The  Caribs  talk  of  their  Okoyumo  being  like  a  camudi  snake, 
but  much  bigger;  it  Uves  in  undergroimd  water:  in  habitat,  it 
corresponds  closely  to  the  variety  of  Water  Spirit  which  the  Warraus 
call  Ahtiba.  In  cases  of  snake-bite  among  certain  tribes,  in  addition 
to  any  other  treatment  the  bitten  person  must  neither  drink  water, 
bathe,  nor  come  into  the  neighborhood  of  water,  during  the  period 
immediately  following  the  accident  [cf.  Sect.  317]:  the  same  prohibi- 
tion, for  a  similar  period,  is  incumbent  on  his  children,  his  parents,  and 
his  brothers  and  sisters  so  long  as  they  reside  in  the  same  settlement. 
His  wife  alone  is  free  from  the  taboo  (ScR,  ii,  130).  The  freedom  of 
the  woman  from  such  an  inconvenience  is  interesting  when  regarded  in 
conjunction  with  the  belief  in  human  milk  as  an  eflBcacious  antidote 
for  snake-poison. 


244  ANIMISM   AND  FOLK-LOEE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS    [eth.  ANN.  30 

181.  Of  Water  Spirits  in  tlie  form  of  fish  I  must  note  the  Omars, 
of  which,  so  far  as  the  name  is  concerned,  the  only  record  I  can  find 
is  given  by  im  Thurn.     These  are  beings — 

With  bodies  variously  described  as  like  those  of  exaggerated  crabs  and  fish,  who 
live  under  water  in  the  rapids,  and  often  drag  down  the  boats  of  the  Indians  as  they 

shoot  these  places A  story  was  told  me  at  Ouropocari  fall  on  the  Essequibo.  .  .  . 

This  Omar  used  to  feed  on  rotten  wood,  and  he  dragged  down  many  boats  merely  in 
mistake  for  floating  logs,  but  all  the  same  the  Indians  were  drowned.  So  one  day  an 
Ackawoi  peaiman  carefully  wrapped  up  two  pieces  of  the  wood  with  which  fire  is 
rubbed,  so  that  no  water  could  make  them  damp.  Then  he  dived  down  into  the  mid- 
dle of  the  falls,  and  got  into  the  belly  of  the  Omar.  There  he  found  whole  stores  of 
rotten  wood.  So  he  set  fire  to  this.  Then  the  Omar,  in  great  pain,  rose  to  the  sur- 
face, belched  out  the  peaiman  and  died.     [IT,  385.J 

I  do  not  know  whether  this  author  was  aware  that  omar  is  the 
Arawak  term  for  that  terrible  little  fish,  the  pirai,  whose  peculiarly 
destructive  powers  would  constitute  a  capital  groundwork  on  which 
to  weave  fabulous  embellishment,  though  there  is  a  suspicion  that 
the  word  is  but  a  play  on  the  word  Jonah,  the  exploits  of  these 
extraordinary  individuals  being  so  closely  parallel. 

183.  I  obtained  a  somewhat  similar  story  from  the  Warraus  of  the 
Moruca  River. 

The  Piai  in  the  Water  Spirit's  Belly  (W) 

Plenty  of  men  would  go  fishing  down  the  river,  but  every  now  and  again  one  of 
their  number  would  disappear:  a  Ho-arinni,  one  of  the  Water  Spirits,  caught  him. 
It  caused  the  son  of  the  local  piai  to  exclaim:  "What  ever  can  be  the  matter  with  the 
stream?  Friends  of  mine  go  regularly  to  fish,  and  just  as  regularly  does  one  of  them 
disappear."  Traveling  to  the  particular  spot  where  the  alleged  "accident"  always 
took  place,  he  himself  was  caught  and  taken  away  by  Ho-ardnni.  It  was  now  the  turn 
of  the  piai  to  say,  ' '  I  will  go  to  the  place  where  my  son  disappeared, ' '  and  wise  in  his 
generation  he  carried  with  him,  in  his  corial,  banab  posts,  firewood,  and  fire.  Before 
taking  his  departure  he  warned  his  wife  that  perhaps  Ho-ar4nni  would  swallow  him 
also,  but  that  if  not,  she  might  expect  him  to  return  within,  a  month.  He  traveled 
down  the  stream,  and  turning  a  jwint,  his  boat  was  suddenly  engulfed  within  the  open 
jaws  of  the  Water  Spirit  there  lying  in  wait:  boat,  posts,  firewood,  and  fire  were  all 
swallowed  with  him.  When  at  last  the  piai  "caught  himself '  [i.  e.  came  to  his  senses], 
he  was  in  complete  darkness;  so  after  lighting  his  fire,  he  began  to  make  himself 
comfortable  and  set  up  his  banab,  by  sticking  the  half-dozen  rods  in. regular  sequence 
deep  into  the  Water  Spirit's  belly.  Ho-ardnni  naturally  experienced  acute  pain  and 
went  to  consult  a  piai  friend  of  his  who,  however,  could  give  him  no  relief,  but  advised 
him  to  go  elsewhere.  The  sufferer  therefore  visited  another  medicine-man,  who  told 
him  practically  the  same  thing:  "I  cannot  help  you.  It  is  just  what  you  can  expect 
for  treating  people  of  my  profession  in  the  way  you  do. "  As  a  last  resource  he  went  to 
a  third  doctor,  of  even  greater  renown  than  the  others,  but  by  this  time  the  piai 
within  was  making  the  pains  ten  times  worse,  with  the  heaping  up  of  the  firewood 
on  the  lighted  fire,  and  the  sticking  in  of  the  posts  around.  All  the  consolation  he  got 
was,  "There's  nothing  to  cure  you.  It  is  all  your  own  fault  and  you  must  die." 
Ho-ar4nni  accordingly  considered  it  time  to  retrace  his  journey  and  make  haste 
homeward.  The  paias  becoming  so  strong,  he  raised  himself  out  of  the  water  just 
as  a  fish  does  when  he  becomes  poisoned  with  the  haiari  root  and,  risiag  to  the 
surface,  gasps  for  breath.     The  piai  inside  kept  a  sharp  lookout,  and  when  Ho-ar- 


BOTH]  THE   SPIEITS  OF   THE   WATEB  245 

4nni  gasped,  he  recognized  an  immense  sheet  of  water  which  showed  that  they 
were  still  far  away  out  at  sea.  In  a  little  while  the  Water  Spirit  gasped  again,  and  the 
piai  could  just  see  a  small  hush  in  the  far,  far  distance.  On  the  third  occasion 
he  recognized  clearly  the  trees,  and  taking  the  next  opportunity  of  Eo-arinni  rising  to 
the  surface,  he  shoved  himself  and  his  corial  out  of  the  creature's  jaws  and  hastened 
home.  When  he  saw  his  wife,  all  he  could  say  was :  ' '  I'am  come  only  to  show  myself,  for 
what  with  all  the  heat,  my  hair  is  dropping  oft  and  I  must  die. ' '  And  he  did  die  soon. 
Several  of  the  Water  Spirits  used  to  be  bad,  like  the  one  we  have  just  been  talking 
about,  but  fortunately  for  us  present  Warraus,  our  ancestors  killed  most  of  them,  and 
this  is  the  reason  they  are  so  scarce  now. 

183.  Some  of  these  Water  Spirits  have  been  derived  from  himian 
mortals  as  well  as  from  ammals. 

(In  connection  with  the  following  story  see  Sect.  162D.) 

Sisters  PoKPOisE  and  Sea-cow  {Mariatus)  (?A) 

Once  there  were  two  sisters  who  had  a  Bush-cow  [tapir]  for  a  sweetheart:  he  used  to 
live  with  both  of  them.  They  had  a  habit  of  regularly  going  to  their  field,  collecting 
the  plums  (hobu),  of  which  their  lover  was  so  fond,  and  making  drink  from  them; 
when  it  was  ready  they  whistled  for  hiTn  to  come.  They  whistled  by  putting  their 
fingers  into  their  mouths  and  blowing.  They  did  this  every  day.  Their  brother  in 
the  meantime  had  his  suspicions  as  to  what  was  going  on,  so  one  day  he  followed 
them,  and  without  being  himself  seen  watched  ever>-thing  that  took  place.  He 
said  nothing,  but  returned  home.  Soon  afterward  the  two  girls  went  to  a  field  other 
than  that  which  they  hitherto  had  been  in  the  habit  of  visiting,  in  order  to  dig  cassava. 
The  brother  seized  the  opportunity  of  visiting  the  place  where  the  Maipuri  lived  and 
where  the  plums  were.  Having  arrived  there,  he  whistled  as  the  girls  used  to  do, 
and  as  soon  as  the  creature  put  in  an  appearance,  he  shot  him  with  his  arrow:  he  then 
cut  the  body  into  pieces,  which  he  scattered.  Next  morning  the  girls  went  as  before 
to  the  old  place  to  make  the  plum-drink,  and  when  it  was  ready,  they  whistled. 
But  no  Maipuri  came.  They  whistled  again,  and  still  their  lover  came  not.  Tired 
of  whistling,  they  commenced  to  search  in  order  to  discover  what  had  happened  to 
him.  It  was  not  long  before  they  found  the  place  where  the  slaughter  had  taken 
place,  and  soon  they  came  upon  the  mangled  remains.  They  both  b^an  to  cry 
and  determined  upon  throwing  themselves  into  the  water.  This  they  did.  One 
sister  turned  into  a  manati,  and  the  other  into  a  porpoise. 

Others  agam  may  claim  genealogical  relations  with  a  totally  dif- 
ferent beast.  On  the  left  bank  of  the  Pomeroon,  just  above  the 
mouth  of  Wakapoa  Creek,  is  a  place  where  the  water  used  to  be 
generally  "on  the  bubble":  this  is  believed  to  be  the  spot  where 
some  gigantic  Salapentas  (lizards)  after  being  vanquished  by  the 
Indians  threw  themselves  into  the  river  and  became  Oriyus. 

184.  Certain  of  the  Water  Spirits  are  of  a  kindly  nature,  in  the 
sense  of  having  conferred  gifts  and  blessings  on  mankind  (Sect.  185), 
in  saving  men  from  drowning  (Sect.  179),  and  in  other  ways. 

The  Fisherman's  Water-jxjg  and  Potato  (A) 

There  was  once  a  fisherman  who  went  fishing  daily,  and  whose  catch  was  invariably 
large.  One  day,  when  out  in  his  corial  something  pulled  at  his  line  but  he  missed 
it:  three  or  four  bites  followed,  yet  he  caught  nothing.  Once  more  he  tried.  Some- 
thing tugged  at  the  hook;  he  hauled  in  the  line,  and  what  should  he  drag  up  to  the 


246  ANIMISM   AND   FOLK-LOEB   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS    [bth.  ANN.  30 

surface  but  Oriyu  herself!  There  she  was,  the  real  Spirit  of  the  Water,  with  all  her 
beautiful  hair  entangled  in  the  line.  It  was  but  the  work  of  a  minute  to  get  her 
into  his  boat,  and  she  was  indeed  beautiful  to  look  upon.  So  beautiful  was  she  that 
he  carried  her  home  to  his  mother,  and  made  her  his  wife,  the  only  condition  that 
Oriyu  stipulated  being  that  neither  her  prospective  husband  nor  her  mother-in-law 
should  ever  divulge  her  origin.  Being  so  accustomed  to  the  water,  Oriyu  proved  an 
excellent  helpmate:  out  she  would  go  with  her  husband,  in  his  boat,  and  look  into 
the  depths  for  fish.  These  she  could  see  when  no  one  else  could,  and  she  would  advise 
him  not  to  throw  his  line  in  here,  but  over  there,  and  so  on.  And  thus  day  after  day 
they  returned  home,  always  bringing  the  old  mother-in-law  plenty  of  fish.  As  you 
can  well  imagine,  this  happiness  did  not  last  very  long;  it  came  to  an  end  through 
the  old  woman,  when  in  liquor,  loosening  her  tongue  and  letting  out  the  secret  of 
Oriyu's  origin.  Oriyu  said  nothing  at  this  time,  so  grieved  she  was,  but  she  waited 
her  opportunity  to  take  her  husband  with  her  to  her  former  home  under  the 
waters.  So  on  the  next  occasion  that  the  crabs  began  to  "march"  from  out  the  ocean 
to  the  shore,  the  family  made  up  a  large  party,  and  all  took  their  places,  with  their 
quakes,  in  a  big  corial.  As  they  were  coming  down  the  river,  Oriyu  all  of  a  sudden 
told  her  companions  that  she  and  her  husband  were  about  to  pay  a  visit  to  her  people 
below,  but  that  they  would  not  be  gone  long,  and  that  in  the  meantime  she  would  send 
up  something  for  them  to  eat  and  drink,  but  they  must  share  everything  fairly 
Without  more  ado  she  and  her  man  dived  into  the  water.  After  awhile  up  came  a 
large 'jar  of  cassiri,  and  a  lot  of  potatoes,  a  very  welcome  addition  to  the  few  pro- 
visions they  had  on  board.  When  they  had  each  had  their  fill  of  the  cassiri,  and 
had  eaten  the  potatoes,  they  threw  the  jug  and  the  useless  skins  back  into  the  water, 
where  the  Oriyu  turned  the  former  into  the  giant  low-low  [Silurus]  and  the  latter 
into  the  squatty  little  imiri  [Sciadeicthys].  This  is  why  we  old  Arawaks  always  speak 
of  the  low-low  as  the  fisherman's  water-jug,  and  of  the  imiri  as  his  potatoes. 

185.  Brett  mentions  certain  other  good  qualities  of  the  Oriyus. 
Out  on  one  of  the  islands  all  the  men,  women,  and  children  were 
struck  down  with  sickness.  ArawdniH  [cf.  Hariwah,  Sect.  3],  the 
island  chieftain,  begged  Oriyu  for  some  charm  to  withstand  the  Evil 
Spirit's  power  which  had  made  his  people  sick.  She  gave  him  the 
branch  of  an  Ida  tree,  which  she  told  him  to  go  and  plant,  and 
to  bring  back  to  her  the  first  fruit  that  should  fall  from  it.  This 
turned  out  to  be  a  calabash  (Crescentia) ,  with  which  he  did  what  he 
was  told.  Having  emptied  the  rind  through  certain  holes  cut  in  it, 
she  provided  him  with  the  feathered  handle,  and  dived  into  the  sea 
whence  she  brought  the  shining  white  stones  to  put  into  it;  with 
these  she  thereupon  showed  him  how  to  invoke  the  Spirits.  Thus 
was  the  first  maraka  (rattle)  formed.  Besides  this,  she  taught 
ArawaniM  the  use  of  tobacco,  till  then  unknown  to  man  (BrB,  18). 

186.  Like  the  Spirits  of  the  Forest,  the  Oriyus  have  strong  sexual 
predilections.  Every  night,  in  their  anthropomorphic  form,  both 
males  and  females  may  come  after  Indians  of  the  opposite  sex, 
respectively,  and  no  disastrous  result  follows  the  intimacy.'  But 
the  Indians  who  happen  to  have  such  dealings  must  keep  the  fact 
absolutely  secret:  if  divulged,  either  they  will  not  live  long,  or  they 

1  Among  some  of  the  old  Warraus  the  product  of  an  abortion  is  described  as  the  Water  Spirit's  child 
being  2  or  3  inches  long,  with  the  head  like  that  of  a  horse  and  the  feet  like  those  of  a  lizard. 


BOTH]  THE   SPIBITS   OF   THE   WATEE  247 

will  never  be  visited  again  by  their  Spirit  friends.  Furthermore, 
those  Indians  who  foster  such  friendships  must  on  no  account  have 
similar  dealings  with  their  own  people.'  Perhaps  it  is  as  a  result  of 
these  sexual  weaknesses  of  the  Spirits  that  some  of  the  Arawaks 
believe  in  the  possibility  of  an  Oriyu  introducing  into  the  womb  a 
full-term  fetus,  provided  the  woman  really  wants  to  be  pregnant 
(Sect.  284A) — a  real  water-baby. 

187.  How  THE  Water  Spmrr  Got  the  Man's  Wife  from  Him  (W) 

A  man  took  his  ■wife  with  him  on  a  fishing  expedition.  He  built  a  banab  on  an 
island  in  midstream  and  as  night  came  on  told  his  wife  to  remain  there,  while  he 
went  to  fish.  She  was  very  anxious  to  accompany  him  in  the  corial,  but  he  insisted 
on  her  remaining  and  of  course  she  had  to  obey.  Being  very  tired,  she  soon  afterward 
fell  asleep,  and  about  midnight  the  Water  Spirit  paid  her  a  visit.  .  .  Half- 
dazed,  she  woke  up,  and  asked  him  whether  he  had  done  anything  to  her,  and  when 
he  told  her  that  he  had,  recognizing  a  stranger's  voice  in  place  of  her  husband's,  she 
felt  very  much  ashamed.  However,  the  Water  Spirit  told  her  who  he  was,  of  his 
great  love  for  her,  and  that  he  would  now  take  her  to  wife:  all  she  had  to  do  was  to 
tell  her  previous  husband  that  it  was  entirely  his  fault  that  she  had  been  left  alone 
and  taken  advantage  of,  and  that  henceforth  she  declined  to  share  his  hearth  and 
home.  So  when  the  latter  returned  next  morning  from  his  fishing,  the  wife  made  a 
clean  breast  of  everything,  for  which  she  blamed  him,  as  he  had  refused  to  let  her 
accompany  him  in  the  corial,  and  she  told  him  further  that  she  intended  living  with 
him  no  more.  They  started  now  on  their  way  home,  and  getting  into  the  boat,  they 
paddled  a  short  distance,  when  the  wife  said:  "After  today  you  will  not  see  me.  You 
must  tell  all  my  family  to  meet  me  tomorrow  at  a  spot  that  I  will  show  you."  As 
they  traveled  along,  she  showed  him  the  very  spot  and  at  the  same  moment  the  boat 
stopped,  just  as  if  some  one  were  holding  it.  She  got  out,  the  water  coming  up  to  her 
knees,  and  the  corial  continued  on  its  journey.  After  a  while  the  husband  turned 
around  to  have  a  look,  and  saw  his  wife  with  another  man,  the  Water  Spirit,  just  step- 
ping ashore:  as  he  turned  the  point,  the  couple  were  walking  together  along  the  river- 
bank.  Now,  when  he  reached  home  without  his  wife,  all  her  people  wanted  to  know 
what  had  become  of  her;  the  mother  especially  was  angry,  but  became  somewhat 
mollified  when  he  assured  her  that  next  day  he  would  take  her  to  the  very  place 
where  her  daughter  had  left  him.  He  also  gave  her  a  message  from  his  late  wife  that 
she  was  to  bring  the  silver  nose-ornament  and  the  bead  bracelets  and  necklets  which 
the  latter  had  left  behind.  So  on  the  following  morning  he  took  the  mother  down  to 
the  river-bank,  and  there  sure  enough  they  saw  the  guilty  couple,  the  daughter  and 
the  Water  Spirit,  behaving  in  a  very  friendly  manner.  As  they  got  quite  close,  the 
Spirit  suddenly  disappeared,  leaving  the  woman  by  herself.  The  mother  then  handed 
over  the  beads  and  ornaments,  while  her  daughter  murmured:  "Your  son-in-law 
caused  this  trouble:  he  would  not  let  me  come  into  the  corial  with  him;  and  so  when 
I  was  fast  asleep  the  Water  Spirit  took  advantage  of  me."  Mother  and  daughter 
sobbed,  and  the  latter  said:  "You  will  see  me  sometimes,  but  never  distinctly:  directly 
you  think  you  see  me  clearly,  I  will  disappear."  No  one  knew  at  the  time  that  the 
Water  Spirit  had  taken  advantage  of  the  man  also:  but  it  was  this  Spirit  who  had 
made  the  husband  refuse  to  let  his  wife  keep  him  company  in  the  corial,  so  as  the 
better  to  carry  out  his  wicked  design. 

1  This  e^lains  a  curious  phase  of  Indian  character:  Celibacy  in  either  sex  is  regarded  as  something 
uncanny  or  unnatural.  It  is  on  this  account  tliat  two  very  respected  residents  in  my  district,  leading 
presumably  irreproachable  celibate  lives,  were  believed  by  many  of  the  Indians  to  have  enjoyed  intimate 
relations  with  the  Oiiyu. 


248  ANIMISM  AND  FOLK-LOEE  OF   GUIANA  INDIANS    [bth.  ANN.  30 

187A.  How  THE  Water  Woman  Secured  a  Landsman  foe  Hus- 
band (W) 

A  corialful  of  men  were  paddling  down  the  river  to  catch  crabs.  They  reached 
the  sea,  and  while  hunting  in  and  among  the  bushes  one  of  the  party  heard  a  noise 
behind  him,  and  turning  around  was  much  surprised  to  see  a  young  woman  there, 
and  still  more  so  when  he  heard  her  say:  "Brother !  I  am  come.^  My  father  sent  me 
to  you  to  give  me  a  quake  of  crabs."  Having  handed  them  over  to  her,  she  paid  him 
with  the  loan  of  her  body.  Before  taking  her  departure  she  told  him  that,  while  the 
boat  containing  him  and  his  friends  would  be  passing  up  the  creek  on  the  way  home,  it 
would  suddenly  stop  of  itself  in  a  certain  spot:  he  was  then  to  jump  into  the  water 
and  join  her,  and  she  would  bring  him  to  his  own  home  later  on.  This  is  exactly 
what  did  occur.  When  the  man  and  his  friends  had  filled  their  quakes  and  boarded 
the  corial ,  he  told  them  that  he  had  acted  in  an  evil  way  to  a  girl  among  the  crab  bushes, 
and  that  when  the  boat  suddenly  stopped  of  its  own  accord,  he  would  have  to  jump 
out,  but  that  he  would  join  them  later  on.  After  a  while  the  corial  suddenly  came  to 
a  standstill,  oiu'  friend  jumped  out,  and  his  friends  left  him  standing  in  the  water 
where  the  girl  was  holding  him  up.  They  reached  home  at  last,  and  on  arrival  at  the 
landing-place  their  women  were  waiting  to  carry  the  crabs  up  to  the  house.  The  one 
who  was  disappointed  at  not  seeing  her  husband  asked  what  had  become  of  Mm. 
They  told  her  that  he  had  acted  wrongly  with  a  girl,  and  that  they  had  left  him  behind. 
In  the  meantime  the  erring  spouse  was  taken  by  the  Ho-ardnni  girl  [Sect.  777]  to  her 
people  below,  and  her  father  told  him  that  he  had  been  sent  for  because  his  daughter 
wanted  him.  But  he  added:  "You  can  go  home  to  your  own  people  this  very  day, 
and  enjoy  the  feast  of  crabs  that  you  and  your  friends  have  been  gathering.  I  make 
only  this  one  condition.  If  there  is  any  disturbance  or  fighting  at  the  sport,  you  must 
come  back  here  at  once:  otherwise,  you  may  remain  with  your  own  people,  and  we 
will  not  trouble  you  further.  I  am  sending  both  my  daughters  with  you."  And  so 
it  came  to  pass  that  the  two  girls  took  him  to  his  own  landing-place,  and  when  they 
got  near,  they  told  him  to  shut  his  eyes.  As  soon  as  he  opened  them  again  he  found 
himself  on  land,  close  to  his  house.  He  entered,  and  telling  every  one  "how  day?" 
sat  down:  his  wife  brought  him  food  and  drink.  But  as  the  evening  progressed,  the 
people  all  began  to  be  quarrelsome  in  their  cups,  with  the  result  that  his  brothers-in- 
law,  sisters-in-law,  and  wife  all  threatened  to  beat  him  for  sporting  with  the  strange 
girl.  This  was  quite  enough  for  him.  He  rushed  out  of  the  place  right  back  to  the 
landing,  where  the  two  Water  Women  were  awaiting  him,  and  who  asked  why  he 
was  not  enjoying  himself  at  the  party.  But  when  he  told  them  how  his  people  had 
commenced  to  interfere,  and  had  threatened  to  beat  him,  they  took  him  back  into 
the  water,  where  the  old  Ho-ar4nni  father  said,  "Take  my  two  daughters  to  wife." 

188.  These  Water  People  have  great  Hkiiig  for  women  at  the 
menstrual  period,  so  much  so  that,  at  such  a  time,  no  Carib,  Akawai, 
Warrau,  or  Arawak  woman  will  travel  by  boat  or  even  cross  water. 

The  Moon-sick  Girl  and  the  Water  Spirit  (C) 

A  young  girl  had  reached  the  age  when  she  was  developing  certain  signs  indicative  of 
approaching  womanhood.  Her  mother  went  as  usual  to  work  in  the  field,  but  on  her 
return  was  much  surprised  to  see  neither  daughter  nor  house,  and  in  place  of  the  latter 
a  large  sheet  of  water.  She  said  that  Okoyumo  must  have  carried  her  girl  away,  and 
began  to  weep.    When  her  husband  later  on  came  back  from  the  chase,  she  told  him 

'  For  this  mode  of  address,  see  Sect.  116. 


BOTH]  THE   SPIRITS   OF    THE   WATER  249 

that  Okoyumo  had  Bwallowed  her  daughter,  and  this  news  upset  him  much.  "I  do 
not  want  to  live  without  my  girl,"  he  cried;  "Okoyumo  mtist  swallow  me  also,"  and 
so  saying,  he  jumped  into  the  flood.  The  Spirit  of  the  Water,  however,  did  not  want 
to  punish  him,  and  so  would  not  let  Mm  drown,  but  just  made  him  float  level  with 
the  suriace;  he  of  course  could  not  be  sick  in  the  same  way  as  the  girl.  It  is  the 
scent  of  a  woman's  sickness  when  in  that  condition  that  makes  her  so  attractive  to 
Okoyumo. 

189.  The  Moon -sick  Gxri.  axd  the  Water  Spmn  (W) 

There  was  once  a  little  girl  by  the  river-side  catching  fish  with  a  cassa-vTi-sifter. 
She  caught  one  little  fish  entirely  different  from  anjiliing  she  had  ever  seen;  it  was 
so  pretty,  with  beautiful  eyes,  and  a  slim  bod)",  covered  with  red  spots.  "What  a 
pretty  fish  you  are !  "  she  exclaimed;  "I  must  really  keep  you  all  for  myself.  "  So 
she  put  it  alive  in  water  in  her  calabash  and  took  it  home,  where  she  dug  a  little  hole 
near  the  house.  Into  this  hole  she  poured  water,  and  there  she  placed  the  fish.  Then 
she  tended  it,  and  strange  to  say  the  water  never  dried  up.  The  fish  gradually  grew 
bigger  and  bigger,  and  when  it  had  arrived  at  a  good  size,  its  guardian,  who  had 
already  entered  womanhood,  took  it  down  to  the  water-side  just  where  she  used 
to  bathe.  There  she  set  it  free.  As  soon  as  she  got  into  the  water,  it  would  approach 
and  nestle  quite  close  to  her.  The  mother  often  saw  it  swimming  about  there,  and 
would  often  warn  her  daughter  that  it  was  not  a  real  fish,  but  something  else,  and  when 
it  got  very  big,  she  recognized  it  as  the  Ho-ar4nni,  or  the  Water  Spirit.  Then  she  warned 
her  girl  especially  to  keep  out  of  the  stream  when  she  was  moon-sick.  "Don't  go 
anywhere  near  the  water  until  so  many  days  are  paased, "  the  mother  repeated;  but 
her  advice  was  not  heeded,  and  the  young  woman,  although  sick,  insisted  next  day 
on  bathing.  As  soon  as  she  touched  the  fish,  as  had  hitherto  been  her  wont,  it  became 
much  excited,  and  instead  of  coddling  up  to  her,  swam  zigzag  around  her.  This  was 
repeated  three  times:  the  fish  meant  to  tell  her  that  she  mu.st  return  at  once  to  shore, 
but  she  evidently  did  not  understand,  because  she  touched  it  a  fourth  time.  But 
on  this  occasion  the  Water  Spirit  swallowed  her.  The  father  wa.H  sorely  grieved 
at  this,  and  came  and  asked  the  Ho-ardnni  why  he  had  treated  his  daughter  in 
that  shameful  manner,  but  the  latter  defended  himself  by  saying  that  she  had 
insisted  on  bathing  herself  too  soon  after  she  had  been  moon-sick,  and  that  he 
had  already  warned  her  three  times.  So  saying,  the  Water  Spirit  withdrew. 
When  he  was  gone,  the  father  exclaimed,  "As  Ho-ariinni  has  eaten  my  daughter, 
he  must  eat  me  too:  I  cannot  rest  until  he  does."  Being  a  piai,  he  knew 
where  to  find  the  Water  Spirit,  so  collecting  his  relatives  around  him,  he  told  them 
what  he  proposed  doing,  and  that  when  they  heard  him  blow  his  shell  they  must  dig 
at  the  very  spot  indicated.  With  this,  he  dived  into  the  water,  right  down  below  the 
river  bank  under  an  overhanging  hill,  straight  into  the  underground  cavern  of  the 
Water  Spirit.  And  there  Ho-ariinni  killed  him,  but  before  he  died,  he  blew  his sheU; 
his  friends  heard  him,  and  digging  quickly,  soon  imearthed  the  pair.  They  killed  the 
Water  Spirit,  and  left  his  bones  to  rot.  Some  fifteen  years  ago,  when  I  was  so  high 
[indicating  his  size],  I  saw  the  bones  rotting  on  Wakapoa  Creek,  above  where  the 
Mission  now  stands,  ^"hy  was  the  piai  killed?  Because  he  ought  not  to  have  gone 
alone;  when  people  start  on  such  expeditions  they  should  always  have  company. 

190.  Like  the  Bush  Spirits,  the  denizens  of  the  deep  are  in  large 
measure  responsible  for  the  disease  and  sickness  existent  in  th« 
world:  the  Carib  medicine-man  still  invokes  them  (Sect.  309). 


250  ANIMISM  AND  FOLK-LOBE  OF  GXHANA  INDIANS   [bth.ann.  30 

How  Sickness  and  Death  Came  into  the  World  (W)  * 

A  man  went  fishing,  and  wished  for  a  wife  from  among  the  Water  People,  the  Ho- 
ariinnis.  Every  time  he  went  to  the  water  his  heart  yearned  to  see  a  Water  Spirit, 
and  one  day,  while  fishing,  one  put  in  an  appearance  waist-high  above  the  surface, 
and  came  quite  close.  "Would  you  like  to  take  me  home  with  you?"  was  the  first 
question  she  asked  him,  and  when  he  told  her  "Yes, "  she  clambered  into  his  corial, 
and  he  took  her  home.  ^Mien  they  reached  there  she  told  him  not  to  roast  the  morokot 
fish  [Myletes]  which  he  had  caught,  but  to  boil  it,  and  impressed  him  that  for  the 
future  he  must  never  bring  fish  for  her  to  eat,  but  only  animals  and  birds.  Thenextday 
she  went  with  him  in  the  corial  while  he  fished,  and  after  a  time  got  into  the  water 
and  went  deep  down.  After  a  while  she  came  up  to  the  surface  again,  with  a  message 
from  her  father,  who  said  he  would  be  very  glad  to  welcome  him  below.  The  man 
was  afraid  to  go,  but  the  woman  told  him  to  have  no  fear  as  nothing  woiild  happen  to 
him.  Just  to  show  that  there  was  no  danger  she  stood  straight  up  in  the  water,  which 
came  to  the  level  of  her  hips.  ' '  Come  along !  Don't  be  frightened, "  she  repeated,  and 
BO  he  jumped  in  close  by  her  side.  Saying  that  she  was  going  to  tie  the  boat  up  with 
a  rope,  she  bent  down  and  seizing  the  head  of  a  big  water-camudi,  clamped  its  jaws 
on  the  gunwale.  She  now  took  the  man's  hand,  and  led  the  way  below:  as  he  sank 
below  the  surface  he  shut  his  eyes  and  opening  them  almost  immediately  afterward, 
found  himself  in  the  house  of  his  father-in-law.  The  latter  gave  him  a  bench  to  sit  on, 
which  was  really  a  large  live  alligator.  This  is  how  it  has  come  to  pass  that  we  Warraus 
always  use  a  bench  carved  in  the  likeness  of  that  creature .  When  he  had  sat  on  it  some 
time  the  old  man  said,  "I  sent  you  my  daughter  for  your  wife:  you  must  live  a  good 
Ufe,  and  must  now  send  down  your  sister  for  my  son. "  This  was  all  agreed  to,  and  the 
man's  Ho-ar4imi  wife  brought  him  dry  boiled  meat  and  cassava:  the  eating  done, 
she  gave  hijn  to  drink.  When  all  was  finished,  she  led  him  up  to  the  surface  again. 
They  got  into  the  corial  and  reached  his  home  once  more.  She  then  said  to  him: 
"Remember,  when  I  am  moon-sick  you  must  not  send  me  away  to  the  naibo-manoho,'' 
but  you  must  let  m?  remain  in  the  hut  with  you.  In  fact,  if  you  insist  on  my  going 
there  I  shall  die,  and  if  I  die,  my  father  will  have  a  spite  against  you,  and  send  you 
sickness  and  death. "  Now  the  Warrau  people  were  strongly  averse  to  such  a  defiance 
of  their  long-established  custom,  and  when  the  man's  wife  did  at  last  become  moon- 
sick,  the  women  insisted  on  her  going  into  the  naibo-manoko,  but  they  found  her  lying 
dead  there  the  following  morning.  Placing  her  body  in  a  hoUowed-out  piece  of  ite 
palm,  they  put  it  on  a  sort  of  babracote  under  a  banab  [as  the  Warraus  of  the  Orinoco 
treat  the  bodies  of  their  dead].  After  a  few  days  the  widower  went  back  to  his  usual 
fishing-place,  wishing  he  could  see  his  wife  again,  but  being  unable  to  see  her  any- 
where, he  became  exasperated  and  flimg  himself  into  the  water,  sinking  down  in  j  ust  the 
same  spot  as  on  the  previous  occasion.  He  reached  the  house,  and  there  on  the  farther 
side  lay  his  poor  wife.  She  looked  ill;  indeed,  she  was  quite  dead.  Her  old  father 
turned  to  him  and  said:  "Why  didn't  you  listen  to  my  daughter?  ^Miy  didn't  you 
do  what  she  told  you?  You  see  how  you  have  killed  her.  From  now  on  sick- 
ness, accident,  and  death  will  come  among  your  people  from  mine,  and  what  is  more 
if  any  of  your  women-folk  travel  on  water  while  they  are  moon-eick  [Sects.  188, 189], 
my  people  will' draw  their  shadows'."    [Sect.  i?55.]'    The  man  was  much  grieved  to 


1  See  Sect.  108. 

s  The  Naibo-manoko  is  the  little  out-house  tor  the  special  use  of  women  at  their  periods,  and  sometimes 
tor  the  use  of  a  female  during  confinement.  It  can  always  be  distinguished  by  the  tassels  of  "skinned" 
Mauritia  leaves  (those  from  which  the  cortex  has  been  removed  for  twine  manufacture),  hanging  from  the 
posts  and  other  parts.  This  building  is  of  course  taboo  to  the  males,  though  I  am  afraid  that  advantage  is 
often  taken  by  bachelor  friends  of  this  isolation  of  the  females  from  their  husbands. — W.  E.  R. 

8  What  is  intended  is,  that  just  as  a  person  draws  the  entrails  out  of  a  fowl,  so  will  the  Water  People, 
or  Ho-arinnis,  draw  the  Shadow,  or  Life-essence,  out  of  a  person,  that  Is,  kill  him. 


BOTH]  THE   SPIRITS   OF   THE   WATEK  251 

hear  all  this,  and  returned  to  liisown  home  by  the  way  that  he  had  come.  By  and  by 
he  arranged  with  his  Irienda  and  relatives  to  go  to  sea,  never  thinking  of  the  warning 
which  the  Water  People  had  given  him.  They  started  in  two  big  canoes  and  got  out 
into  deep  water;  so  deep  that  to  the  Ho-ai&anis  at  the  bottom  the  corials  looked 
like  two  parrots  flying  in  the  skies.  Nevertheless,  these  Water  People  shot  at  them 
with  their  round-knobbed  arrows,  hit  them,  and  both  boats  sank.  When  they  got  to 
the  bottom,  the  Water  People  put  one  of  the  canoes  on  each  side  of  the  old  man's 
house,  and  unchained  their  sharks — for  these  people  keep  sharks  as  we  keep  dc^s — 
which  tore  to  pieces  the  bodies  of  the  already  dead  occupants  of  the  two  canoes. 
Before  that  time  Wanaus  never  had  accidents  or  death;  they  had  only  moon-sickness. 
It  was  in  this  manner  that  the  Water  People  punished  the  Warraus. 

191.  Not  only  are  many  of  tlie  troubles  aflBicting  mankind,  as  just 
recorded  in  the  legend,  ascribable  to  the  machinations  of  Oriyu,  but 
he  (or  she)  is  held  responsible  for  more  than  one  natural  phenomenon. 
The  tidal  wave,  or  bore,  known  as  appapuru  [an  Arawak  term]  on  the 
B^bice  and  other  streams,  in  certain  of  this  colony's  rivers  is  a  case 
in  point.  Among  the  natives  the  popular  explanation  is  that  when 
this  River  becomes  inconveniently  low  for  the  had  things  of  the  deep, 
they  show  their  uneasiness  by  moving  furioiisly  about,  and  thus 
agitate  the  river  (Da,  21).  The  several  tribes  on  the  coast,  we  learn 
from  Doctor  Hancock,  usually  give  it  some  name,  signifying  "head 
of  waters"  or  "mother  of  waters,"  and  in  connection  with  this  have 
many  strange  stories  to  tell  of  the  Loku-kuyuha  (people's  spirit)  mer- 
maid, or  "watery  mamma"  as  they  translate  it  (ScC,  288).  Again, 
Wailak-paru,  a  creek  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Potaro,  is  so  called 
from  a  part  of  the  himian  body,  and  is  beheved  to  be  the  home  of 
Oriyu:  the  tm-bulence  of  the  water  as  it  nms  into  the  Potaro  is 
caused  by  water  issuing  from  the  body  of  that  Spirit. 

192.  The  Water  Spirits  must  not  be  talked  about,  nor  may  their 
names  be  mentioned. 

Amaxxa  and  her  T.^lkative  Husband  (C) 

Heated  with  the  fumes  and  liquor  of  a  big  paiwarri  feast,  an  Indian  succeeded  in 
making  his  way  to  the  pond  where  he  intended  bathing  his  skin  and  getting  cool. 
On  arrival  there,  he  was  met  by  Amanna,  one  of  the  Okoyumo  Nation,  a  very  pleasant- 
spoken  woman,  who  asked  him  to  join  her  in  the  water.  He  demurred  at  first,  but 
what  with  her  repeated  requests  coupled  with  the  attractiveness  of  her  physical 
charms,  he  ultimately  consented.  Even  at  the  last  moment,  he  said  he  felt  sure  that 
he  would  be  drowned ;  but  she  promised  to  look  after  him  and  see  that  no  harm  befell. 
When  they  got  below  the  surface,  he  saw  a  number  of  houses,  plentj-  of  people,  and 
many  young  women:  he  felt  quite  content  now,  especially  when  the  latter  offered 
him  drink.  But  Amanna  would  have  none  of  this,  and  took  him  straight  away  to  her 
old  father,  vho  gave  him  welcome  and  instructed  his  daughter  to  look  after  him 
properly.  And  tliis  she  did.  In  the  meantime  the  man's  mother  had  missed  hiTn 
from  the  convivial  gathering,  and  following  his  tracks,  traced  them  to  the  water's  edge; 
and  there  the  tracks  disappeared.  '"My  poor  son  must  have  been  drowned,"  she  mur- 
mured, and  proceeded  to  look  for  his  floating  body;  but  of  course  it  was  nowhere  to  be 
seen,  and  she  mourned  him  a  long  time  as  dead.  Thus,  time  slipped  on,  and  the  desire 
came  on  him  to  see  his  mother;  so  he  \'isited  her.    After  she  had  asked  him  where  he  had 


252  ANIMISM   AND  FOLK-LOBE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS    [eth.  ann.  30 

been  in  the  meanwhile,  he  told  her  that  he  had  been  for  a  "walk-about."  This  made 
the  old  woman  say:  "Well,  you  must  not  go  away  again,  because  I  am  aged  now  and 
starving.  I  cannot  depend  on  your  little  brother  to  support  me,  and  you  know  I  have 
no  other  children."  But  the  man  had  a  bad  mind,  and  went  back  that  very  afternoon 
to  his  Water  Spirit  wife,  and  on  this  occasion  remained  with  her  even  longer  than  he 
had  done  before.  When  at  last  he  returned  after  his  second  absence,  he  found  his, 
mother  and  little  brother  drinking  paiwarri.  The  latter  questioned  him  point  blank 
as  to  whether  he  was  living  with  the  Okoyumo  People.  This  naturally  made  him 
extremely  angry  and,  with  a  "How  dare  you  ask  me  such  a  question?"  he  hurried 
back  to  the  water,  where  he  remained  a  still  longer  period  than  that  of  his  second 
absence.  In  the  meantime  Amanna  had  borne  him  three  children,  and  leaving  the 
latter  behind,  he  told  his  wife  to  accompany  him  on  a  visit  to  his  mother.  The  couple 
on  arrival  found  the  old  mother  and  her  younger  son  again  at  a  drinking  party,  but 
this  time  the  son  was  absolutely  drunk,  and  nothing  would  do  but  he  must  ask  his 
elder  brother  as  before  whether  he  was  living  with  the  Okoyumo  People.  "Yes, 
I  am !  "  replied  the  exasperated  man, ' '  and  this  is  my  wife,  Amanna,  one  of  that  nation . ' ' 
Directly  the  woman  heard  this,  she  made  all  haste  to  the  waterside,  and  jumped  into 
the  water,  her  husband  in  close  pursuit.  As  soon  as  he  got  below  her  friends  and  rela- 
tives set  on  him  and  killed  him  for  having  mentioned  her  name  and  telling  people 
who  she  was. 

193.  Besides  their  dislike  to  hearing  mention  of  their  names  and 
antecedents,  as  well  as  their  passion  for  menstruating  women,  it  is 
interesting  to  note  the  strong  objection  of  the  Water  Spirits  to  a 
pot-spoon  being  washed  outside  of  the  traveling  boat  in  either  river 
or  sea  (Sects.  214,  ^19). 

194.  The  surest  way  of  offending  the  Water  Spirits,  however,  and 
thereby  getting  caught  in  a  storm,  and  being  capsized,  wrecked,  or 
di'owned  by  way  of  punishment,  is  to  utter  certain  words  strictly 
forbidden  under  the  circumstances.  Thus,  among  the  Arawaks  of  the 
Pomeroon  and  Moruca  Rivers,  there  are  certain  terms  which  must 
never  be  employed  when  on  a  boat:  they  have  to  be  paraphrased. 
The  majority  of  these  tabooed  words  are  evidently  of  foreign  (mostly 
Spanish)  origin :  a  few  are  certainly  indigenous.  Thus,  the  occupants 
of  a  corial  wiU  never  be  heard  to  use  the  term  arcabuza  (gun),  but 
they  will  speak  of  a  gun  as  Icataroro  (foot,  referring  to  the  stock); 
they  talk  of  Icariro  (the  one  with  the  teeth)  instead  of  perro  (Span., 
dog) ;  of  Tcanakara-shiro  (load  on  the  head,  the  cock's  comb)  instead 
of  gai-ina  (Span.,  gallina,  fowl);  of  akwadoa-kotiro  (round  foot) 
instead  of  Icawai-yo  (Span.,  cahallo,  horse);  of  Icakwaro  (horn) 
iastead  of  hakTca  (Span.,  vaca,  cow);  of  tataro  (something  hard) 
instead  of  sereri  (grindstone,  or  saw,  probably  from  Span,  sierra) ;  of 
majeriJci  (the  imtrimmed  one,  referring  to  the  hair)  instead  of  h6-a 
(monkey);  of  ehedoa  (frothing,  brimming  over,  in  reference  to  its 
snarhng  or  growhng)  instead  of  aroa  (tiger);  of  Jcatau-chi  (the  one 
with  wisdom)  instead  of  semi-chichi  (medicine-man),  etc.  The  War- 
raus,  it  seems,  had  also  various  words  strictly  taboo  when  traveling 
by  boat.  The  same  holds  good  for  Cayenne,  where  the  superstitious 
Indians  take  care  not  to  speak  of  several  things  by  their  right  names : 


BOTH]  THE   SPIBITS   OF    THE   WATEB  253 

thus,  if  one  has  to  speak  of  a  rock,  it  must  be  described  as  "  that  which 
is  hard;"  if  it  is  a  Hzard,  they  must  similarly  paraphrase  by  saying 
"that  which  has  a  long  tail."  It  is  dangerous  also  to  name  the 
streams  and  little  islands  that  they  pass  en  route.  Even  the  medi- 
cine-men may  not  be  mentioned  as  such :  infringement  of  this  rule 
will  cause  at  least  rain  to  fall,  without  reckoning  that  one  is  exposed 
to  shipwreck,  together  with  the  hkelihood  of  some  frightful  monster 
rising  from  out  the  deep,  and  swallowing  the  whole  lot  (PBa,  184). 
Records  have  been  left  to  us  of  similar  practices  by  the  Carib  islanders. 
When  they  have  to  cross  the  sea  .  .  .  upon  approaching  land,  this 
must  not  be  named  or  pointed  out,  but  it  can  be  noticed  by  shouting 
Lyca!  "It  is  there! "  (BBR,  245). 


Chapter  XIII 

THE  SPIRITS  OF  THE  SKY 

The  Sun,  male:  Greeted  of  a  moming  (195);  eclipsed  (196);  origin  of  Hs  wannth 
and  heat  (197).  The  Moon,  also  male:  Cause  of  the  "spots"  (198);  beliefs  concerning 
the  "new"  moon  (199);  when  eclipsed,  a  transformation  of  animals  occurs  (200); 
causes  of  eclipse  (^01-202).  Cometa  (20S).  Stars:  Moming  and  Evening,  etc,  (204); 
the  Milky  Way  (205);  Southern  Cross  (206);  Babracote  and  Camudi  (207);  Pleiades— 
their  story  told  by  Arawaks  (208),  Akawais  (209),  Warraus  (210),  Caribs  (211); 
Orion's  Belt  (211A).  Other  Sky  Spirits  derived  from  man  (212).  The  Woman  of 
the  Dawn  (212 A).  Rain:  Can  be  made  as  required  (21S);  punishment  for  iofringe- 
ment  of  taboo  (214);  can  be  stopped  (215);  Rainbow  (216).  Weather-forecasting 
(217).    Thunder  and  Thunderbolts  (218).    Storms  generally  (219). 

195.  The  Stin  seems  to  have  been  regarded  invariably  as  a  male 
(Sect.  29):  The  SaHbas  of  the  Orinoco — certainly  a  section  of  the 
tribe— claimed  to  be  his  children  (G,  i,  113).  At  Enamouta  Village, 
on  a  branch  of  the  Ireng,  it  would  appear  to  be  the  usual  practice 
for  the  Indians  to  issue  simultaneously  from  their  houses  at  daylight 
and  greet  the  mom  -with  cries  and  loud  shouts  (Bro,  129) .  It  weis  cus- 
tomary for  the  Otomacs  to  bewail  the  dead  as  a  matter  of  daily 
routine.  "Thus,  as  soon  as  the  cocks  crow,  about  3  o'clock  in  the 
morning,  the  air  is  rent  with  a  sad  and  confused  sound  of  cries  and 
lamentations,  mixed  with  tears  and  other  appearances  of  grief. 
They  mourn  not  by  way  of  ceremony,  but  in  very  truth.  When  day 
breaks,  the  wailing  ceases  and  joy  reigns"  (G,  i,  167).  So  also  on 
the  Vichada,  a  branch  of  the  Orinoco,  the  Guahibos  at  sunrise  come 
out  with  a  pan-pipe  and  make  the  round  of  the  village  while  playing 
on  this  instrument,  but  their  purpose  in  doing  so  is  not  made  clear 
(Cr,  554).  Among  the  Wapisianas  of  the  upper  Rid  Branco,  the 
first  to  awake  strikes  a  drum  until  all  jump  out  of  their  hammocks, 
and,  in  the  meantime,  with  a  quick  step,  he  will  promenade  around 
the  maloka  with  his  barbarous  music  (Cou,  ii,  268) .  With  the  Island 
Caribs  the  flute  is  ordinarily  played  in  the  moming  when  they  rise 
(RoP,  509). 

196.  It  is  said  by  im  Thurn  that  on  one  occasion,  during  an  eclipse  of 
the  sun,  the  Arawak  men  among  whom  he  happened  to  be  rushed  from 
their  houses  with  loud  shouts  and  yells :  they  explained  that  a  fight 
was  going  on  between  the  Sun  and  the  Moon,  and  they  shouted  to 
frighten  and  so  part  the  combatants  (IT,  364).  Brett  speaks  of 
Oroan,'  the  great  Demon  of  Darkness,  who  causes  eclipses;  he  seizes 

1  Warraus  tell  me  that  this  word  is  a  form  of  Yurokon,  the  name  of  the  Carib  Bush  Spirit. — W.  E.  E. 
254 


BOTH]  THE   SPIEITS   OF   THE   SKY.  255 

the  Sun  and  strives  to  quench  the  fire,  till  scorched  and  blackened, 
he  retires,  only  to  return  another  time  (BrB,  1S9).  In  Cayenne, 
ecUpses  of  the  Sun  and  Moon  upset  the  Indians  a  good  deal:  they 
think  some  frightful  monster  has  come  to  devour  these  heavenly 
bodies.  If  the  eclipse  is  total  or  of  short  duration,  they  consider  it 
a  fatal  thing  for  them :  they  make  a  terrible  noise,  and  shoot  a  volley 
of  arrows  into  the  air  to  chase  away  the  monster  (PBa,  232).  Island 
Caribs  attribute  the  eclipses  to  Maboia,  the  devil,  who  tries  to  kiU 
Sim  and  Moon:  "they  say  that  this  wicked  seducer  cuts  their  hair 
by  surprise,  and  makes  them  drink  the  blood  of  a  child,  and  that, 
when  they  are  totally  eclipsed,  it  is  because  the  Stars,  being  no 
longer  warmed  by  the  Sun's  rays  and  hght,  are  very  iU"  (Ti,  18S6, 
p.  227). 

197.  The  Story  of  Oko6-hi  (W)* 

Waiamari  was  the  name  of  a  young  fellow  staying  at  the  house  of  his  uncle.  One 
day  he  went  down  to  the  water-side  to  bathe.  When  in  the  water,  he  heard  some  one 
running  down  the  pathway  and  then  a  splash.  This  made  him  look  around,  and, 
recognizing  his  uncle's  young  wife,  he  commenced  swimming  to  a  distance.  But 
she  chased  him.  The  girl  wanted  him  very  much,  and  as  she  got  close  to  the  spot 
where  he  waa,  whispered,  "Don't  you  want  me?"  Instead  of  replying  quietly,  how- 
ever, Waiamari  loudly  upbraided  her  by  shouting  BiUU  Kwahorol  ["Incest  1  Shajne ! "), 
and  the  girl  drew  back.  The  uncle,  hearing  the  noise  up  at  the  house,  called  out  to 
his  wife,  "What's  the  matter?  Don't  trouble  the  boy,"  because  he  thought  that 
she  must  be  at  fault,  and  not  his  nephew.  At  any  rate  the  couple  got  out  of  the 
water,  and  came  up  to  the  house,  which  the  aimt  entered,  the  boy  passing  on  to  go 
to  stay  with  his  elder  uncle,  Okohi,  at  whose  place  he  slept  that  night.  Now,  the 
very  fact  of  not  going  home  as  usual  with  his  aunt  made  Waiamari  guilty  in  the  eyes 
of  her  husband,  who  followed  his  nephew  next  morning  to  Okohi's  place.  When  he 
reached  there,  he  reproached  his  nephew  for  having  attempted  improper  conduct 
with  his  wife,  a  charge  which  was  indignantly  denied.  At  any  rate,  they  started 
fighting  and  the  uncle  was  thrown  down.  They  fought  again  and  the  imcle  was 
thrown  a  second  time.  Okohi  now  interfered,  and  said,  "Boy!  That  will  do,"  and 
so  stopped  the  contention  between  his  brother  and  nephew.  Indeed,  to  save  further 
strife,  Okohi  thought  it  best  to  take  AVaiamari  away  with  biTn  on  his  journey,  and 
told  the  youngster  to  prepare  the  waija  [canoe],  as  he  proposed  leaving  next  morning. 
So  Waiamari  went  down  to  the  water-side  and  painted  the  sign  of  the  Sun  on  the  bows 
of  the  boat,  while  at  the  stern  he  painted  a  man  and  a  moon."  Next  morning  the 
two  got  away,  the  nephew  paddling  in  the  bow  and  the  uncle  steering:  it  was  a  big 
sea  that  they  were  crossing,  and  as  the  paddle-blades  swept  along  one  could  hear  the 
water  singing  Wau-u!  Wau-u!  Wau-uf '  At  last  they  crossed  this  big  sea  and  reached 
the  opposite  shore,  where  they  landed,  and  then  they  went  up  to  a  house  near  by, 
where  they  met  a  pretty  woman,  Assawako.*  After  greeting  Okohi,  and  telling 
him  to  be  seated,  she  asked  him  to  let  his  nephew  accompany  her  to  the  field,  and, 
this  permission  being  granted,  the  young  couple  started  oft.  'VThen  they  reached 
there  Assawako  told  Waiamari  to  rest  himself  while  she  gathered  something  for  him 
to  eat.     She  brought  him  yellow  plantains  and  pines,  a  whole  bundle  of  sugar-cane, 

>  This  word  okdhi  among  tbe  Warraus  means  the  hottest  part  of  the  day;  it  refers  to  the  warmth  and 
heat  of  the  sun  as  distinguished  from  its  power  of  producing  light. 

>  Even  up  to  very  recent  times  the  Indians'  canoes  were  thus  decorated  with  Sun  and  Moon. 
I  This  sound  would  correspond  with  the  English  "  SwishI  SwishI  SwishI " 

<  This  Is  tbe  Warrau  term  for  any  smart,  sensible  female. 


256  ANIMISM   AND   FOLK-LOKE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS    [eth.  ax.n.  30 

some  ^ratermelons,  and  peppers;  he  ate  the  lot  and  spent  a  very  happy  time  -srith 
her.  On  the  way  back,  she  asked  him  -whether  he  was  a  good  hunter:  he  said  never 
a  word  but  stepped  aside  into  the  bush,  and  soon  rejoined  her  with  a  quakeful  of 
armadillo  flesh.  She  was  indeed  proud  of  him,  and  resumed  her  place  behind.' 
Just  before  reaching  home,  she  said:  "We  are  going  to  have  drink  when  we  get  in. 
Can  you  play  the  hahabassat"  "  "Yes,  I  can  play  it  a  little,"  was  the  reply.  When 
they  got  back  to  her  place  Assawako  gave  him  a  whole  jugful  of  drink  all  for  himself, 
and  this  primed  him  for  playing  the  music;  and  he  played  beautifully,  making  the 
kahabassa  sing  Waru-huru-tia.^  They  sported  all  night,  and  next  morning  Okohi 
made  ready  to  leave.  Of  course  poor  Assawako  wanted  AVaiamari  to  remain  with 
her,  but  he  said:  "No!  I  can  not  leave  my  uncle.  He  has  been  good  to  me,  and  he 
is  an  old  man  now."  So  she  began  crying,  and  between  her  sobs  told  him  how  sad 
she  felt  at  his  going  away.  This  made  him  feel  very  sorry  also,  and  he  consoled  her 
by  saying,  "Let  us  weep  together  with  the  kahabassa."  And  there  and  then  he 
sang  Herur-heru,  etc.,  on  the  instrument,  and  thus  comforted  her  before  he  left. 

Now  when  at  last  uncle  and  nephew  got  back  to  their  own  country,  old  Okohi 
bathed  his  skin,  and  after  seating  himself  in  his  hammock,  gathered  all  his  family 
around  and. spoke  to  them  as  follows:  "When  I  was  young,  I  could  stand  traveling 
day  after  day,  as  I  have  just  done,  but  I  am  old  now,  and  this  is  my  last  journey." 
So  saying,  his  head  "burst,"  and  out  of  it  there  came  the  Sun's  warmth  and  heat. 

198.  The  Moon  also  is  clothed  with  male  attributes,  and  among 
the  tribes  here  dealt  with,  as  is  the  case  with  many  another  savage 
race,  is  held  responsible  for  certain  conditions  met  with  during  the 
child-bearing  period  of  woman's  life.  I  have  heard  the  following  tra- 
dition among  both  Arawaks  and  Warraus: 

How  THE  Moon  Got  his  DrRrr  Face 

Long  ago  a  brother  and  his  sister  were  living  by  themselves.  Every  night  after 
dark  some  one  used  to  come  and  fondle  and  caress  the  sister,  attentions  which  she  was 
very  far  from  being  averse  to,  but  she  was  very  curious  to  discover  who  her  unseen 
visitor  was.  She  could  never  find  out.  She  therefore  blackened  her  hands  one 
day  with  the  soot  from  the  bottom  of  the  pepper-pot,  and  when  her  lover  came  that 
evening,  she  smeared  her  hands  over  his  face.*  "When  day  dawned  she  thus  came  to 
learn  that  it  was  her  own  brother  who  had  taken  advantage  of  her.  She  was  extremely 
angry,  abused  him  roundly,  and  told  the  neighbors,  who  in  turn  spread  the  story  of 
his  conduct  far  and  wide.  The  result  was  that  everybody  shunned  him,  and  he 
became  at  last  so  thoroughly  ashamed  of  himself  that  he  declared  he  would  keep 
away  from  everyone,  and  live  by  himself.  He  is  now  the  Moon,  and  the  marks  which 
can  still  be  recognized  on  his  face  are  those  which  his  sister  imprinted  with  the  soot 
(or  blue  paint)  years  ago.  Even  to  this  day  women  do  not  trust  him,  and  no  matter 
whether  he  is  new,  full,  or  pn  the  wane,  there  will  always  be  found  somewhere  a 
female  who  is  in  such  a  physiological  condition  as  will  preclude  all  possibility  of  the 
moon  wishing  to  pay  her  a  visit.* 

1  On  the  marcli  the  Indians  always  walk  in  file,  the  men  leading. 

'  This  is  the  name  of  an  obsolete  form  of  musical  instrument,  which  none  of  my  Warrau  friends  have 
ever  seen,  but  have  only  heard  of,  and  hence  can  not  furnish  me  with  particulars.  From  indirect  evi- 
dence, however,  I  am  inclined  to  believe  that  it  was  some  form  of  the  "crow-«kull"  gourd-flute — the 
Warrau  bure-akwa.—'W .  E.  E. 

*  This  sound  would  correspond  with  our  hootiti-tootiti,  etc. 

'  This  is  the  Arawak  version.  The  Warraus  say  that,  instead  of  soot,  she  used  the  humatiiba,  the  blue 
paint  of  the  Caiibs. 

s  Ehrenieich  (37)  cites  a  somewhat  similar  story  of  incest  and  subsequent  discovery.  In  which  the  girl, 
however,  becomes  the  Moon,  given  by  Barboza  Kodiiguez,  from  the  Kio  Jamunda. 


BOTH)  THE  SPIBITS   OF   THE   SKY.  257 

199.  A  peculiar  custom  among  the  Makusis,  practised  as  soon  as  the 
new  moon  is  visible  (Sect.  227),  is  that  of  all  the  men  standing  before 
the  doors  of  their  huts,  and  drawing  their  arms  backward  and  forward 
in  its  direction  at  short  intervals :  by  this  means  they  are  strengthened 
for  the  chase  (ScR,  n,  328).  "As  soon  as  the  new  moon  appears,  they 
aU  run  out  of  their  huts  and  cry  Loole  at  ths  moon!  .  .  .  They  take 
certain  leaves,  and  after  rolling  them  in  the  shape  of  a  small  funnel, 
they  pass  some  drops  of  water  through  it  into  the  eye,  while  looking 
at  the  moon.  This  is  very  good  for  the  sight"  (BBR,  228).  The 
first  night  of  the  incoming  moon  was  considered  the  proper  occasion 
for  obtaining  clay  for  the  manufacture  of  pots  and  other  utensils 
which,  it  was  beUeved,  would  not  speedily  be  broken  (Sect.  £58). 

200.  With  regard  to  the  explanations  given  as  to  the  nature  of  the 
ecUpse  of  the  moon,  I  have  obtained  the  following  at  firstr-hand  from 
the  Pomeroon  Arawaks.  The  phenomenon  is  due  to  its  traveUng 
along  the  Sun's  path,  faUing  asleep,  and  so  not  being  able  to  get  out 
of  the  way  quickly  enough.  With  the  object  of  awakening  the  Moon 
members  of  this  tribe  strike  drums,  blow  shells,  and  make  a  big  noise 
generally,  whenever  the  echpse  takes  place.  They  must  also  keep 
themselves  lively  and  active,  and  during  the  whole  night  must  eat 
absolutely  nothing;  were  they  to  break  the  fast,  they  would  change 
into  whatever  animal  or  plant  they  might  be  eating  (Sect.  £4^). 
Indeed,  it  is  a  common  beUef  among  these  people  that,  at  the  time  of 
an  echpse,  there  is  a  constant  change  or  transformation-scene  taking 
place  on  Nature's  stage,  in  both  animal  and  vegetable  kingdoms, 
owing  to  tliis  cause.  The  transformation  is  not  necessarily  sudden 
but  may  take  time.  I  can  call  to  mind  an  old  Arawak  story  of  a  hunt«r 
who  had  gone  to  visit  one  of  the  streams  away  back  from  the  Monica 
River:  On  the  first  occasion  he  sees  a  huge  land-camudi;  on  the 
second,  at  the  time  of  an  ecUpse,  he  finds  the  snake  changed  into  a 
tapir;  and  on  the  third  he  sees  it  swimming  in  the  water  as  a  manati. 

201.  As  to  the  Orinoco  Indian  tribes,  GumiUa  has  left  us  some  very 
interesting  records  concerning  the  eclipse  of  the  moon.  Some  of 
these  nations  beheved  that  it  was  about  to  die:  others  that  it  was 
angry  with  them,  and  that  it  would  give  them  no  more  light.  The 
LoMca  and  Atabdca  Indians  held  to  the  death  theory  (G,  11,  274) 
and  were  under  the  conviction  that  if  the  Moon  were  indeed  to  die, 
all  exposed  fires  would  be  extinguished.  Their  women,  crying  and 
yelUng — an  outburst  in  which  the  men  joined — accordingly  would 
each  seize  a  glowing  ember  and  hide  it,  either  in  the  sand  or  under- 
ground. Moved  by  their  tears  and  entreaties,  the  Moon  however 
recovers,  and  the  hidden  fires  are  extinguished:  but  were  he  indeed 
to 'die,  the  concealed  embers  would  remain  ahght.  The  Sahvas  had 
different  views  (G,  11,  277).  All  the  warriors  stand  up  in  rows  facing 
the  Moon,  offering  liim  their  prowess  and  strength  and  entreating 

15961°— 30  ETH— 15 17 


258  ANIMISM   AND  FOLK-LOBE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS    [bth.  ann.  30 

him  not  to  leave  them.  The  young  nien,  of  15  to  20  years  of  age, 
stand  in  two  rows  apart  while  certain  old  men  roughly  thrash  them 
in  turn  with  whips.  Finally,  the  women,  in  a  sea  of  tears  bewail 
the  Moon's  projected  departure  and  fatal  absence.  The  idea  would 
seem  to  be  that  the  Moon  has  enemies  whom,  through  fear,  he  is 
anxious  to  avoid,  and  he  is  therefore  desirous  of  giving  the  benefit 
of  his  light  to  other  nations.  It  is  only  the  promises  of  these  Indian 
warriors  to  fight  in  his  favor  which  allay  his  fears,  and  hence  there  is 
no  necessity  for  him  really  to  take  himself  off.  As  soon  as  the 
Guay^nas  (G,  ii,  278)  recognize  an  eclipse  of  the  moon,  they  take  up 
the  implements  used  in  cultivating  their  fields.  With  much  talk 
and  gesticulation,  some  cut  the  undergrowth,  others  clear  it,  and 
others  again  dig  up  the  ground,  all  of  them  loudly  proclaiming  that  the 
Moon  has  cause  for  being  annoyed,  and  particularly  good  reason  for 
forsaking  them,  considering  that  they  had  never  made  a  field  for  him. 
They  accordingly  beg  him  not  to  go,  because  they  are  now  providing 
him  with  a  field,  in  which  they  propose  planting  maize,  cassava,  and 
plantains.  With  these  promises  and  entreaties  they  continue  at 
their  task,  working  on  it  with  vigor  so  long  as  the  eclipse  lasts;  and, 
as  soon  as  it  is  over,  they  return  to  their  houses  overjoyed.  But 
there  is  no  more  working  on  the  field  in  the  Moon's  behalf  until  the 
next  eclipse  takes  place!  Among  the  Otomacs  (G,  ii,  279),  when  the 
event  occurs,  the  husbands  aimlessly  take  up  their  weapons,  skip 
about,  and  yell  beyond  measure,  stretch  the  arrow  on  the  bow  in 
sign  of  anger,  and  ask,  beg,  and  implore  the  Moon  not  to  die.  While 
they  continue  in  their  grief,  the  Moon  goes  on  diminishing  and  lan- 
guishing. Kecoghizing  from  this  that  their  actions  are  not  under- 
stood, they  run  back  to  their  houses,  where  they  bitterly  reproach 
their  wives  for  not  grieving  over  and  bewailing  the  Moon's  sickness. 
The  latter  make  not  the  slightest  sign  that  they  understand  what  is 
expected  of  them,  and  answer  never  a  word.  The  men  then  change 
their  tactics  and  start  begging  and  beseeching  their  wives  to  cry 
and  weep,  so  that  the  Moon  may  revive  and  not  die.  Still  the 
women  act  as  if  they  do  not  understand  what  is  besought  of  them. 
So  the  men  give  them  presents — glass-beads,  monkey-tooth  neck- 
laces, jewelry,  and  the  like.  The  women  now  understand  in  truth, 
and  saying  many  prayers  soon  make  the  Moon  shine  as  bright  and 
clear  as  before — for  doing  which  they  earn  their  husbands'  gratitude. 
According  to  their  idea  it  is  the  female  voices  that  move  the  Moon 
to  take  compassion  on  them,  and  save  them  from  extinction. 

203.  The  Uaupes  River  (Rio  Negro)  Indians  believe  that  at  an 
eclipse,  Jurupari  (Sect.  101)  is  killing  the  Moon;  they  make  all  the 
noise  they  can  to  frighten  him  away  (ARW,  348).  So  again,  the 
Island  Caribs  say  that  Maboya  (Sect.  84)  is  eating  the  Moon  on  such 
an  occasion:  they  dance  all  night,  and  rattle  their  calabashes  with 


BOTH]  THE   SPIBITS   OF   THE   SKY.  259 

little  pebbles  inside  (RoP,  461).  Schomburgk  points  out  the  curious 
fact  that  the  Taruma  word  for  a  moon  eclipse  is  fiwa-toto,  the  hteral 
translation  of  which  is  'Moon-Earth'  (ScR,  ii,  469). 

203.  Any  reference  to  comets  in  the  Indian  literatme  is  extremely 
scarce.  With  regard  to  the  one  that  was  seen  by  Schombiu-gk  in  the 
early  forties,  the  Arekunas  and  Makusis  regarded  it  as  a  sign  of 
pestilence,  famine,  and  disaster.  One  night  they  all  emerged  from 
their  huts  .  .  .  men,  women,  and  children  extended  their  arms  expres- 
sive of  supplication  and  beseeched  it  to  leave  the  heavens,  so  that 
they  should  not  come  to  grief  under  its  influence  .  .  .  the  Makusis 
called  it  Ca-po-eseLma, "  Fire-Cloud,"  or  Wae-inopsa, "  Sun  that  throws 
its  rays  behind";  the  Arekunas  gave  it  the  name  of  Wa-taima,  and 
the  Wapisianas  Capische,  both  terms  signifying  "Spirit  of  the  Stars" 
(ScR,  II,  308).  The  Pomeroon  Arawaks  speak  of  the  present  year's 
(1910),  Halley's,  comet,  simply  as  Wiwa-kihi-koro  Git.  "Star-tail- 
with"),  but  have  no  information  to  furnish  concerning  it.  Among 
the  Island  Caribs,  Limacani  is  a  comet  sent  by  Coualina,  the  "boss"  of 
the  Chemeens  [i.  e.,  Familiar  Spirits]  to  cause  evil  when  he  is  vexed 
(BBR,  231). 

303A.  In  the  Makusi  legend  of  Murapa-yeng  (lit.  Bat  Mountain, 
one  of  the  Pakaraima  Range)  the  phenomenon  is  ascribed  to  an  old 
woman  carrying  a  fire-stick  under  somewhat  pathetic  circumstances: 
Schomburgk  tells  the  story. 

The  Legend  of  Bat  Mountain 

A  long,  long  while  ago,  an  immense  Bat  Uved  on  the  mountain  and  spread  fear  and 
terror  among  the  Makusis.  As  soon  as  the  Sun  had  sunk  in  the  west,  the  huge  creature 
left  its  unknown  dwelling,  swept  down  upon  the  happy  homes,  and,  swift  as  an  arrow, 
pounced  upon  and  carried  off  anyone  whom  it  found  out  of  doors:  it  carried  the  indi- 
vidual in  its  powerful  claws  up  to  its  unknown  nest  and  there  devoured  him.  Fear 
reigned  of  an  evening  throughout  the  settlements  and  in  the  huts,  and  lamentation 
filled  the  air  of  a  morning  when  often  two,  sometimes  three,  persons  would  be  missing; 
not  a  night  passed  without  an  abduction,  the  tribe  daily  numbered  less,  and  its  entire 
annihilation  seemed  at  hand.  The  medicine-man  exorcised  the  Spirit;  it  returned 
again:  the  men  went  to  discover  the  residence  of  the  ciirsed  murderer,  but  they  did 
not  find  it — ^Makunaima  was  not  with  them.  To  prevent  the  total  destruction  of  her 
tribe  an  old  woman  arose  and  declared  herself  ready  to  sacrifice  herself  for  the  good 
of  her  nation.  When  night  fell,  she  stationed  herself,  with  a  covered  fire-stick,  in 
the  middle  of  the  village  while  the  remainder  of  the  people  crouched  in  terror  within 
their  houses.  The  fluttering  of  the  wings  is  heard,  and  the  heroine,  seized  in  the 
creature's  frightful  claws,  is  carried  aloft  to  the  chamel  house.  She  now  uncovers 
the  fire-stick,  which  like  the  Sun  throwing  its  rays  backward  (the  Cometh,  shows  by 
the  streak  of  light  thus  produced  the  direction  that  the  people  must  foUow  to  find 
the  mortuary  house  of  their  brethren.  The  high  flames  of  fire  from  the  burning  nest 
upon  this  very  mdUntain  showed  the  folk  next  morning  where  to  go :  they  succeeded  in 
kiUing  the  creatiire.  History  does  not  say  whether  the  old  woman  lost  her  life  in  this 
heroic  deed;  but  even  now  immense  heaps  of  bleached  bones  are  to  be  found  there. 
(ScR,  n,  189.) 


260  ANIMISM   AND   FOLK-LOBE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS    [eth.ann.  30 

204.  Axawalffi,  Warraus,  in  fact  all  the  Indian  tribes  of  whom  we 
have  reliable  accounts,  possess  myths  and  legends  indicative  of  a 
more  or  less  animistic  conception  of  the  stars  and  constellations. 

Dance  (270)  says  that  Eweiwah,  or  Huewah  (Arawak),  and 
Koiunuk  (Akawai)  are  the  names  of  the  Morning  and  Evening  stars 
interchangeably,  these  tribes  supposing  that  they  are  one  and  the  same. 
Brett  (Br,  107),  on  the  other  hand,  gives  the  Arawak  name  for  Venus 
as  Warakoma  [Waruk6ma],  and  that  generally  used  for  Jupiter  as 
Wiwa  Kalimero  (i.  e.  the  star  of  brightness).  The  Warraus  here  on 
the  Pomeroon  caU  the  Morning  Star  Okona-kura.  She  it  was  who 
stuck  in  the  hole  when  her  people  first  came  down  from  above  the 
skies  to  populate  the  earth  (Sect.  51).  The  Makusis  speak  of  the 
Evening  Star  as  Kai-wono,  wife  of  the  Moon,  because  she  is  to  be 
seen  in  his  near  neighborhood,  and  also  on  account  of  her  shining 
more  brightly  than  all  the  other  stars  (ScR,  n,  328).  According  to 
Father  Gili,  the  Indians  of  the  Casiquiare  believed  that  the  dew 
which  falls  by  night  was  the  spittle  of  the  stars  (AR,  207),  a  belief 
similar  to  that  reported  of  the  Makusis.  The  Caribs  ascribed  it  to  the 
urination  of  the  stars  (ScR,  i,  429).  The  Makusis  speak  of  shooting 
stars  as  Wai-taima  (ScR,  ii,  328).  The  Island  Caribs  regarded  all  the 
heavenly  bodies  as  Carib.  Father  de  la  Borde  mentions  some  j&ve 
or  six  stars  in  their  cosmogony,  but  unfortunately  has  apparently 
not  identified  them.  Racumon  was  one  of  the  first  Caribs  made  by 
Louquo ;  he  was  transformed  into  a  large  snake  with  the  head  of  a 
man;  he  was  always  seated  on  a  cabatas  (a  hard  and  high  tree); 
he  lived  on  its  fruit,  which  resembles  a  large  plum  or  small  apple, 
and  which  he  gave  sometimes  to  those  who  passed;  he  is  now  changed 
into  a  star.  "  Savacou  was  also  a  Carib.  He  was  changed  into  a 
large  bird;  he  is  the  captain  of  the  Storms  and  Thunders;  he  has 
caused  the  heavy  rains,  and  is  also  a  star  now.  Achinaon,  a  Carib, 
at  present  a  star,  causes  light  rain  and  strong  winds.  Couroumon 
(a  Carib),  also  a  star,  causes  the  heavy  sea  waves,  and  upsets  canoes; 
he  is  also  the  cause  of  flood  and  ebb."     (BBR,  229.) 

305.  Arawaks  speak  of  the  MUky  Way  under  two  names,  one  of 
which  signifies  the  Path  of  the  Maipuri  (Tapir),  and  the  other  is  the 
Path  of  the  Bearers  of  Wai-6,  a  species  of  white  clay  of  which  their 
vessels  are  made.  The  nebulous  spots  are  supposed  to  be  the  tracks 
of  Spirits  whose  feet  were  smeared  with  that  material  (Br,  107). 
On  equally  reliable  authority  we  are  told  that  the  three  nebulsB 
within  the  Milky  Way  represent  a  tapir  being  chased  by  a  dog,  fol- 
lowed by  a  jaguar,  who  is  not  particular  in  choice,  so  that  he  take 
either  the  dog  or  the  tapir.  Another  legend  is  that  the  nebulse  were 
formed  by  celestial  wUd  hogs  rooting  up  the  white  clay  (Da,  296). 
The  Makusis  call  the  Milky  Way  Parana,  a  term  which  they  apply  also 
to  the  sea. 


BOTH]  THE   SPIEITS  OF   THE   SKY.  261 

306.  With  regard  to  the  Southern  Cross,  Dance  talks  of  it  as  being 
the  great  White  Crane,  and  gives  a  legend  relative  to  it  (Da,  296). 
Arawaks  and  Warraus,  however,  have  told  me  that  this  represents  the 
powis  {Crax  sp.),  the  nearer  "pointer"  to  it  being  the  Indian  just 
about  to  let  fly  his  arrow,  the  farther  one  indicating  his  companion 
with  a  fire-stick  running  up  behind.  This  constellation  serves  also 
as  an  indication  for  the  hunting  of  the  bird,  Schomburgk  recording 
(ScT,  23)  how,  when  the  Cross  stands  erect,  the  powis  commences 
its  low  moan  (Sect.  98).  The  Makusis  apparently  regard  the  Southern 
Cross  as  the  home  of  the  Spirit  of  this  bird. 

207.  There  are  two  groups  of  stars  described  by  the  Arawaks  and 
certain  of  the  Warraus,  as  the  Babracote  and  the  Camudi:  four  bright 
stars  (Pegasus)  with  four  imaginary  connecting  lines  constitute  the 
square  frame  of  the  former,  another  thick  cluster  (Scorpio)  repre- 
senting the  Snake.     This  is' the  Arawak  story: 

The  Babeacote  and  Camudi  (A) 

There  was  a  man  living  with,  his  wife  and  mother-in-law  in  the  same  house:  the 
wife's  father  had  been  dead  a  long  time.  The  mail  was  always  going  out  hunting,  but, 
although  he  started  early,  and  returned  late,  luck  never  seemed  to  attend  his  efforts. 
This  made  the  mother-in-law  very  angry,  and  one  day  she  said  to  him:  "You  are  a 
worthless  son-in-law.  Day  after  day,  you  go  out  hunting,  and  you  bring  back  nothing. 
Day  after  day,  you  go  out  fishing,  and  bring  back  nothing."  The  man  made  no  reply 
to  all  this,  but  just  laid  himself  quietly  down  in  his  hammock  where  he  remained 
until  next  morning.  Next  morning  he  called  his  wife  and  told  her  to  pack  the  ham- 
mocks with  sufficient  cassava  for  two  or  three  days,  as  he  intended  taking  her  out 
hunting  with  him.  After  they  had  traveled  a  long  way,  he  killed  her,  cut  her  into 
pieces,  and  dried  the  flesh  on  a  babracote.  Next  day  he  returned  home  with  hin 
victim's  liver,  and  handing  it  to  his  mother-in-law  said.  "Here's  the  Uver  of  a  tapir 
for  you.  The  wife  is  laden  with  the  flesh  and  is  slowly  coming  on  behind."  The 
old  woman,  who  was  so  hungry,  spared  no  time  in  eating  it,  and  when  finished  got 
into  her  hammock  quite  satisfied,  anxiously  looking  down  the  pathway  for  her  daugh- 
ter. After  watching  for  some  hours  in  vain,  she  began  to  think  that  the  alleged  tapir's 
liver  must  really  have  been  her  daughter's.  Turning  to  her  son-in-law,  she  charged 
him  with  having  killed  her  daughter,  because  it  was  then  very  late  and  still  she  had 
not  returned.  He  denied  it  and  swore  that  she  would  soon  be  coming,  but  the  woman 
would  not  believe  him.  She  continued  watching  until  late  in  the  night,  and  then 
she  knew  that  the  Uver  she  had  eaten  was  indeed  her  own  daughter's.  Of  course 
she  slept  but  little,  and  early  next  morning  crept  quietly  out  of  the  house,  and  made 
her  way  to  her  brother,  the  large  camudi,  that  lived  at  the  head  of  the  neighboring 
creek.  She  told  him  how  her  son-in-law  had  killed  her  child,  and  given  her  the  liver 
to  eat.  She  told  him  also  that  she  would  send  the  culprit  along  that  very  creek,  and 
that  as  soon  as  he  got  within  reach  he  was  to  catch  and  swallow  him.  When  she  reached 
home  again  the  old  woman  said  nothing,  but  next  day  told  her  son-in-law  that  she 
was  feeling  very  hungry,  that  he  must  go  out  hunting,  and  that  if  he  went  up  to  the 
head  of  the  creek,  he  would  find  plenty  of  game  to  shoot.  The  son-in-law  suspected 
Bomething,  so  he  went  to  a  younger  brother  of  his  and  told  him  to  put  in  a  day's  hunt- 
ing at  the  head  of  that  very  same  creek,  while  he  took  good  care  to  take  his  bow  and 
arrows  in  exactly  the  opposite  direction.  That  same  evening,  instead  of  returning 
to  his  own  place,  he  came  back  to  his  younger  brother's  house.    No  brother  returned 


262  ANIMISM  AND  FOLK-LOBE  OF  GTHANA  INDIANS   [eth.ann.30 

that  night,  nor  the  next  day.  Indeed,  he  never  came  back,  because  he  had  been 
killed  and  swallowed  by  the  camudi,  who  had  mistaken  his  man.  The  son-in-law, 
after  waiting  theie  a  few  days,  then  knew  what  had  happened,  and  niade  his  way 
to  another  settlement,  far,  far  from  the  nagging  old  woman.  On  a  clear  night  you 
can  still  see  the  babracote  where  he  barbecued  his  wife,  and  close  to  its  side  you  can 
just  make  out  the  camudi  with  its  swollen  belly,  due  to  the  younger  brother  being 
inside. 

208.  The  Pleiades,  the  Seven  Stars,  bore  a  very  important  r61e  in 
the  daily  life  of  the  Guiana  Indians  in  that,  among  several  other 
reasons,  their  rising  from  the  east  marked  the  commencement  of  their 
new  year:  this  measm:ement  of  time  was  adopted  from  the  Orinoco  to 
Cayenne.  AH  the  legends  relating  to  the  constellations  Taurus  and 
Orion  have  something  in  common  in  the  detail  of  an  amputated  arm 
or  leg.  Dance  speaks  of  the  Stars  forming  the  belt  and  sword-sheath 
of  the  constellation  Orion  (Da,  343)  as  Mabukuli  (Arawak)  or  Ibbeh- 
pughn  (Akawai).  Now  the  word  Mabukuli  signifies  "without  leg," 
and  the  corresponding  little  story  which  he  relates  (Da,  296)  will  not 
prove  out  of  place  here :  "  A  huntsman  being  imsuccessful  in  the  chase 
one  day,  and  being  loth  to  return  without  flesh  for  his  stepmother, 
whom  he  loved,  cut  off  one  of  his  own  legs,  and  wrapping  it  up  in 
leaves,  presented  it  to  her  as  veritable  game;  and  then  ascended  into 
the  heavens  as  Mabukuli  (Ibbeh-pughn)  or  one-legged." 

309.  The  Legend  of  the  Tumong,  or  Seven  Stars,  as  told  by  Dance 
(296),  apparently  from  Akawai  sources,  is  this : 

The  Legend  of  the  Seven  Stars 

A  man  having  lustful  inclination  toward  bis  brother's  wife  killed  his  brother  while 
hunting  in  his  company,  and  cutting  off  an  arm  of  the  murdered  man,  presented 
it  to  the  widow  as  a  proof  of  her  husband's  death.  He  then  took  her  as  his  own  wife. 
But  the  spirit  of  the  murdered  man  haunted  a  tree  near  by  his  brother's  house,  and 
filled  the  air  at  nights  with  his  laments,  so  that  tHe  widow,  discovering  the  treachery 
of  her  new  husband,  became  disconsolate.  The  fratricide,  from  vexation,  decided  to 
rid  himself  of  her,  and  of  her  little  child.  For  this  purpose  he  took  her  ostensibly  to 
hunt  with  him,  and  observing  a  hole  at  the  root  of  a  large  tree,  he  desired  her  to  stoop 
and  search  therein  for  a  suspected  acouri.  While  she  looked  in,  he  pushed  her  in  com- 
pletely, and  also  her  child  after  her,  and  then  stopped  up  the  hole.  On  that  idght 
the  spirit  of  the  murdered  man  appeared  to  his  brother  and  informed  him  that  he 
knew  of  his  deed  of  violence,  and  was  not  angry;  for  his  wife  had  been  transformed 
into  an  acouri,  and  his  child  to  an  adourie,  so  that  his  unnatural  malice,  save  by  the 
infliction  of  death,  could  not  any  more  affect  them.  For  himself,  he  would  not  cease 
to  render  the  murderer's  life  miserable  so  long  as  his  own  mangled  body  remained 
unburied.  But  if  the  wicked  brotlier  would  disembowel  the  body  and  scatter 
the  entrails,  after  interring  the  other  remains,  not  only  would  the  dead  cease  to  be  a 
terror,  but  at  that  season  every  year  an  abundance  of  fish  would  gather  in  the 
river.  The  wretched  brother  then  went  to  the  place  of  the  bloody  deed,  and  did 
what  he  was  told,  when  the  scattered  entrails  of  the  murdered  man  floated  upward 
to  the  skies,  and  assumed  tlie  appearance  of  the  Seven  Stars.  And  truly,  as  was 
predicted,  on  the  annual  appearance  of  those  stars,  the  yarumak  [Pimelodus  macu- 
latus],  tibicurie  [Prochilodus  rubro-teniatus],  caburessi  [Chialceus  tseniatus]  and  several 
other  excellent  fishes  are  abundant  in  the  rivers. 


both]  the  spibits  of  the  sky.  263 

210.  The  Stoet  of  Nohi-abassi  (W)  ' 

There  were  once  two  brothers:  the  elder,  a  celebrated  hunter,  was  called  Nohi- 
abassi;  I  do  not  know  the  name  of  the  younger  one.  Every  day  Nohi-abassi  went 
farther  and  farther  afield  in  the  pursuit  of  game,  and  at  length  he  reached  a  creek, 
where  he  climbed  a  tree,  watching  for  the  animals  to  come  and  quench  their  thirst. 
While  waiting  among  the  branches,  he  saw  a  woman  wading  up  the  creek  toward 
the  tree  and  noticed  that  every  time  she  put  her  hand  into  tne  water  she  drew  out 
two  fish:  one  of  these  fish  she  put  into  her  mouth;  the  other  she  put  into  her 
basket.  She  was  a  very  big  woman,  Nahakoboni  by  name.^  She  was  carrying  a 
calabash  upside  down,  like  a  cap,  upon  her  head,  and  would  every  now  and  again 
toss  it  into  the  water;  as  she  jerked  it  in,  she  made  it  swirl  round  and  round  like  a 
top,  and  there  she  would  stand  a  few  minutes  watching  it  spinning  on  the  surface. 
Then  she  would  proceed  on  her  way,  put  her  hand  into  the  water,  draw  out  two  fish 
again,  devour  one,  and  place  the  other  in  her  quake.  And  so  she  proceeded  on  her 
way,  passed  the  tree  where  Nohi-abassi  was  in  hiding,  and  still  catching  two  fish  at 
a  time,  went  on  her  way  to  the  creek-head.  Night  caught  the  hunter,  and  so  he 
had  to  sleep  up  the  tree.  Next  morning  he  reached  home,  and  told  his  brother  what 
he  had  seen.  .  The  latter  said,  "I  should  like  to  see  such  a  woman,  who  can  catch  so 
many  fish,  and  can  eat  them  as  well."  But  Nohi-abassi  answered  him:  "No!  I 
don't  care  to  take  you  with  me  to  show  her  to  you:  you  are  always  laughing  at  every- 
thing, and  you  might  laugh  at  her."  And  it  was  only  when  his  brother  faithfully 
promised  not  to  laugh  at  anything  that  he  might  show  him,  that  Nohi-abasai  agreed 
to  take  him.  So  they  started  on  their  journey  and  reached  the  creek  where 
the  adventure  with  the  big  woman  had  taken  place  the  day  before.  Nohi-aba^ 
climbed  the  identical  tree  whence  he  had  originally  seen  Nahakoboni,  this  tree  being 
situated  a  few  yards  away  from  the  creek  bank.  His  brother,  however,  who  wanted  to 
get  a  good  look  at  the  wonderful  woman,  insisted  upon  climbing  a  tree  close  to  the 
water's  edge,  and  made  his  way  up  and  along  a  branch  which  overhimg  the  stream. 
Both  brothers  sat  quiet,  and  by  and  by  Nahakoboni  came  along  as  before,  doing 
just  the  same  thing,  spinning  her  calabash,  putting  her  hand  into  the  water,  drawing 
out  two  fish  at  a  time,  one  of  which  she  put  into  her  mouth,  the  other  into  her  basket. 
At  length  she  came  along  right  underneath  where  the  younger  brother  was  in  hiding, 
and  recognized  his  shadow  in  the  water.  This  shadow  she  tried  again  and  again  to 
catch;  she  put  her  hand  in  quickly,  first  this  side  and  then  that,  but  of  course  she 
did  not  succeed,  and  what  with  all  her  queer  gesticulations  and  funny  capers 
made  so  ridiculous  an  appearance  that  the  brother  up  above  could  not  resist 
laughing  at  her  vain  attempts  to  seize  the  substance  for  the  shadow.  He  laughed 
again  and  again  and  coiUd  not  stop  laughing.  Unfortimately  for  him,  Nahakoboni, 
hearing  the  sound  and  looking  up,  recognized  not  onlyhimwhowas  just  over  her  head, 
but  also  Nohi-abased,  who  was  on  the  other  tree  some  few  yards  distant.  Furious 
at  being  ridiculed  [see  Sects.  59,  liS],  she  ordered  the  former  to  come  down,  but  he 
would  not.  So  she  sent  the  "yackman "  ants [Ecilon  sp.]  up  the  tree;  and  when  they 
reached  him,  they  bit' him,  and  stung  him  so  hard  that  he  had  to  pitch  himself  into 
the  water,  where  she  caught  and  ate  him.  She  then  ordered  Nohi-abassi  to  come 
down,  but  he  would  not  either,  and  so  she  played  him  the  same  trick  by  sending  the 
yackman  ants  again  in  pursuit.  These  forced  him  to  come  down,  and  so  soon  as  he 
reached  the  ground  Naiakoboni  caught  him,  put  him  into  her  basket,  which  she 
tied  up  tight,  and  carried  him  home.  Arrived  there,  she  placed  the  quake  in  a  comer 
of  her  house,  covering  it  with  leaves  and  bushes,  at  the  same  time  giving  her  two 

I  This  name  (lit.  "Leg-half")"  Warrau;  its  aigmflcation  here  will  be  seen  below. 
'  This  female  was  really  a  Bush  Spirit,  or  Hebu,  and  though  of  the  same  name  has  nothing  whatever 
to  do  with  the  old  man  mentioned  in  the  story  in  Sect.  19. 


264  ANIMISM   AND  FOLK-LORE   OF   GXHANA  INDIANS    [eth.  ann.  30 

daughters  strict  injunctions  that  they  were  under  no  pretext  whatever  to  touch  it 
during  her  absence.  Directly  her  back  was  turned  however — and  it  was  not  very 
long  before  she  remembered  that  she  had  to  go  to  her  field  to  pull  cassava — ^the  two 
girls  wanted  to  see  what  their  mother  had  been  at  such  pains  to  hide  from  them. 
They  said,  "Why  did  mother  tell  us  not  to  trouble  the  basket?"  and,  promptly 
removing  the  bushes  and  leaves,  cut  open  the  quake  and  found  a  real  live  man  inside. 
They  took  him  out  to  have  a  good  look,  and  the  younger  sister  could  not  help  exclaim- 
ing, "Oh!  what  a  fine  fellow  he  is,  isn't  he?  "  They  then  asked  him  if  he  was  a  good 
hunter,  and  he  answered  them  that  he  was  and  would  always  bring  them  plenty  of 
game.  Both  girls  therefore  fell  in  love  with  him,  and  the  younger  made  him  hide 
in  her  hammock.  Now,  when  old  Nahakoboni  returned  with  her  cassava,  she  busied 
herself  grating  it,  and  it  was  not  until  everything  else  was  prepared  for  the  feast  that 
she  went  to  the  quake  to  kOl  Nohi-abassi  with  a  view  to  eating  him.  Judge  of  her 
surprise  when  she  found  it  empty!  When  asked  about  it,  the  girls  admitted  that 
they  had  been  to  the  basket  and  let  the  captive  free,  the  younger  one  adding,  "and 
as  he  said  he  was  a  good  hunter,  I  took  him  for  my  husband."  The  old  mother  was 
quite  satisfied  with  this  arrangement,  and  said:  "All  right!  You  can  have  Mm  for 
your  man,  so  long  as  he  regularly  brings  me  something  to  eat,  but  remember,  on  the 
very  first  occasion  th^t  he  returns  home  with  nothing,  I  shall  eat  him."  From  next 
day  on,  Nohi-abassi  started  going  down  to  the  sea  regularly  to  catch  querriman  [Mugil 
brasilieTisis]  for  her.  No  matter  the  size  of  the  load  of  fish  he  procured,  old  Nahakoboni 
would  eat  the  whole  lot,  except  two.  Fishing  like  this  day  after  day  soon  had  its 
effect  upon  poor  Nohi-abassi,  who  got  heartily  sick  of  the  task  of  having  to  procure 
so  much  food  for  his  mother-in-law.  Hig  girl  fell  in  with  these,  views  and  consented 
to  release  In'm  from  so  thankless  a  task  by  running  away  with  him.  So  on  the  last 
trip  he  intended  making  in  the  way  of  bringing  home  fish,  he  left  his  corial,  with  the 
catch  in  it,  a  little  farther  out  from  the  bank  than  had  hitherto  been  customary  with 
him;  indeed,  he  anchored  it  in  deep  water  and  told  a  shark  to  lurk  underneath. 
When  Nohi-abassi  reached  home  he  told  his  wife  as  usual  to  inform  her  mother  that 
he  had  brought  home  a  load  of  fish  in  the  corial,  and  that  she  must  go  down  to  the 
water-side  for  it.'  So  old  Nahakoboni  went  down  the  pathway,  reached  the  creek, 
and  went  into  the  water  to  haul  in  the  corial  with  the  load  of  fish,  but  as  soon  as  she 
reached  the  deep  part  of  the  stream,  the  shark  seized  and  devoured  her.^  In  the 
meantime,  our  hero  and  the  younger  daughtet  made  preparation  for  their  journey, 
but  the  elder  one,  beginning  to  feel  anxious  about  her  mother  staying  away  so 
long,  went  down  to  the  water-side  to  seek  the  cause,  which  she  was  not  long  in 
discovering.  She  returned  in  haste,  and  could  hardly  speak  for  passion.  She 
sharpened  her  cutlass  and  slashed  a  tree  with  it;  the  cut  reached  only  half  through. 
She  sharpened  it  again,  and  slashed  another  tree-trunk;  the  blade  cut  it  clear  through. 
When  Nohi-abassi  saw  what  she  was  doing,  he  recognized  that  his  sin  had  been  dis- 
covered, and  without  further  loss  of  time  made  all  speed  with  his  wife  to  run  away. 
Now,  although  they  had  a  good  start,  Nohi-abassi  soon  recognized  that  his  sister-in- 
law  was  quickly  gaining  on  them.  He  therefore  made  for  the  nearest  tree  and,  telling 
his  wife  to  climb  quickly,  helped  her  up  with  an  occasional  push  behind,  he  following 
closely  at  her  heels.  He  had  just  made  his  third  step  up  when  his  sister-in-law 
reached  him  with  the  cutlass,  and  making  a  slash,  managed  to  cut  off  a  portion  of 
his  leg,  which  stuck  upon  one  of  the  branches.  This  leg  makes  a  noise  like  the 
"maam"— it  is  in  fact  the  mother  or  spirit  of  the  maam  [Tinamus  sp.]  [Sect.  98], 
and  when  people  are  out  shooting  this  bird,  it  is  this  same  leg  which  occasionally 
falls  down  and  kills  the  hunters.    We  can  still  see  Nohi-abassi's  wife  climbing  the 

'  He  could  not,  of  course,  speak  to  the  old  woman  directly,  she  being  his  mother-in-law;  he  himself  was 
precluded  from  bringing  the  fish  up  to  the  house,  as  this  procedure  would  spoil  his  luol£  (Sect.  HU)- 

2  In  another  'Warrau  version  of  the  same  story,  Nohi-abassi  sets  a  big  cage-trap  for  the  fish,  and  asks  an 
alligator  to  remain  alongside,  for  the  same  purpose  and  with  similar  results. 


KOTH]  THE   SPIRITS   OF   THE   SKY.  265 

tree:  she  is  what  we  call  Kura  Moku-moku  [lit.  stars  little,  i.  e.  the  Pleiades]. 
Behind  her  is  Nohi-abassi  himself  [the  Hyades],  and  farther  back  is  his  cut-off  leg 
[Orion's  Belt]. 

211.  Brett's  account  (BrB,  191)  is  of  interest  in  comparison  with 
the  Warrau  story,  and  I  accordingly  adapt  it  here  from  the  metrical 
version.  Before  doing  so,  however,  I  can  but  express  the  proba- 
bility that  the  idea  of  making  Aldebaran  (the  BuU's-eye  in  our  con- 
stellation Taurus)  the  organ  of  vision  for  the  Tapir — ^making,  in  fact, 
the  Tapir  correspond  with  the  Bull — is  the  result  of  contact  with 
African  or  European  influences.  Brett  calls  the  myth  the  Legend  of 
Birikoai,  and  from  internal  evidence  (cf.  Sect.  38)  I  am  inclined  to 
think  that  he  must  have  received  it  from  Carib  sources.  Sirikio  is 
the  Carib  name  for  a  star,  Wailya  for  a  watchman,  and  Wawa  (cf. 
Wawaiya)  for  a  sister  or  a  wife :  on  the  other  hand,  Sahtai  is  the  Akawai 
name  for  an  ax. 

The  Legend  or  Serikoai 

Wawaiya,  the  lately-made  bride  of  Serikoai,  waa  one  day  off  to  her  cassava  field, 
when  she  met  a  Tapir.  He  said  hib  name  was  Wailya,  that  he  liked  her,  and  for  the 
same  reason  had  assimied  that  form  so  as  to  have  the  chance  of  coming  near  her.  He 
came  the  next  day,  and  the  next,  and  every  day  while  Wawaiya  was  on  her  way  to 
the  field,  and  she  became  fonder  and  fonder  of  him.  He  finally  tempted  her,  and 
promised  her  that  if  she  followed  him  to  the  eastward,  until  earth  and  sky  met,  he 
would  resume  his  human  shape  and  take  her  to  wife.  But  she  refused.  So  he 
charmed  her  ax,  and  assured  her  that  if  she  did  what  he  told  her  to  do,  she  would  be 
safe  with  him.  Soon  after,  Serikoai  asked  Wawaiya  to  come  with  him  and  gather 
avocado  pears  [Persea  gratiisima],  which  were  now  ripe,  so  that  while  he  climbed 
the  trees,  she  might  collect  firewood.  She  did  so,  and  while  her  husband  was  up  a 
tree,  she  went  to  grind  her  ax,  but  ever>-  time  it  touched  the  stone  it  railed  out,  "I 
must  cut.  I  must  wound!"  [Sahtai!].  She  asked  her  husband  whether  he  could 
hear  it  talking,  and  he  said , ' '  Yes ;' '  that  it  always  spoke  like  that  when  being  sharpened 
there,  but  she  must  not  worry  over  it.  However,  while  Serikoai  was  descending 
the  tree  she  cut  his  leg  clear  through  and  took  to  flight.  Though  exhausted  by  loss 
of  blood,  Serikoai  plucked  an  eyelash,  and  blew  it  into  the  air,  where  it  became  a 
beautiful  little  bird,  which  he  told  to  fly  away  to  his  mother's  place  and  call  his 
name.  When  the  latter  heard  her  son's  name,  she  did  not  know  what  the  bird  meant, 
and  so  sent  the  bird  back  again  to  find  out.  On  its  return,  she  immediately  rushed 
off  and  nursed  her  son  so  tenderly  that  he  recovered  of  his  wound.  Serikoai  now 
managed  to  walk  about  with  a  crutch,  and  took  up  the  search  to  find  his  wife,  but 
all  traces  of  Wawaiya  had  then  disappeared,  what  with  the  lapse  of  tune  and  the 
heavy  rains.  Nothing  daunted,  however,  he  traveled  on  and  on,  until  at  last  he 
discovered  a  sprout  of  avocado  pear.  A  little  farther  on  he  saw  another,  which 
re^ived  his  hope  of  finding  her,  because  he  now  knew  that  she  who  had  taken  the 
pears  must  have  eaten  them  on  the  road,  and  cast  the  seeds  by  the  wayside.  Traveling 
on  and  on,  always  to  the  eastward,  he  saw  at  last  Wawaiya's  and  Wailya's  footprints, 
and  a  little  farther  on  saw  them  conversing  right  ahead  of  him.  He  thereupon  shot 
tlie  Tapir  and,  cutting  off  its  head,  implored  his  wife  to  return,  saj-ing  that  if  she 
refused  he  would  follow  her  fore\er.  She  did  refuse,  however,  and  hurried  on  with 
her  lover's  spirit  still  after  her,  and  her  husband  behind  them  both.  Still  rushing 
headlong,  the  husband  reached  the  earth's  steep  edge,  where  Wawaiya  threw  herself 
into  the  deep  blue  skj-.     If  you  watch  on  a  clear  night,  you  can  still  see  Wawaiya 


266  ANIMISM   AND   FOLK-LOBE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS    [bth.  ann.  30 

[the  Pleiades]  with  the  Tapir's  head  [the  Hyades:  the  red  eye  is  Aldebaran]  close 
behind,  and  Serikoai  [Orion,  -with  Rigel  indicating  the  upper  part  of  the  sound  limb] 
farther  back— all  three  in  pursuit. 

311A.  Orion's  Belt  is  part  of  the  leg  of  a  woman  (Sect.  98)— of 
Mabukuli  (Sect.  W8),  of  Nohi-abassi  (Sect.  210),  of  Makunaima  (Sect. 
gg) — and  the  arm  of  the  murdered  husband  (Sect.  209) . 

212.  As  has  been  already  mentioned,  the  Spirits  of  people  departed 
may  wander  upward  to  joia  other  Spirits  in  Sky-land  (Sect.  81). 
Some  of  these  may  pass  their  existence  happily,  and  harm  no  one, 
or  in  the  course  of  their  transformation  (Sect.  69)  they  may  become 
changed  into  birds — perhaps  into  birds  of  ill  omen  sometimes — ^and 
so  have  their  place  in  the  heavens.  Again,  the  Spirits  of  good  medi- 
cine-men travel  upward  to  Cloud-land,  and  may  be  invoked  by  their 
surviving  professional  brethren  with  the  aid  of  the  rattle  and  tobacco 
(Sect.  309).  There  are  a  few  other  Spirits  of  the  Sky  who  are  essen- 
tially bad-minded  in  the  sense  of  brin^g  sickness  into  the  world: 
these  also  are  referred  to  elsewhere  (Sect.  309) . 

212A.  The  Woman  of  the  Dawn  (W) 

Plenty  of  people  went  out  to  hunt,  but  on  the  way  back,  four  of  them  were  caught 
by  nightfall  when  far  away  from  home.  These  four  comprised  a  man,  his  wife,  and 
two  daughters;  and  a  long,  long  way  behind  them  was  yet  another  man.  This  last 
man  shouted  out  to  the  four  others,  "Hi!  Stop!  wait  for  me!  wait  for  me! "  to  which 
they  replied,  "Come  along  quick,  and  follow  us."  But  as  he  could  never  reach 
them,  he  kept  on  singing  Mawa-hakotii  [lit.  "for  me — wait"].  He  is  the  little  night 
owl,  who  still  sings  like  this.  The  darkness  was  now  so  thick  that  the  four  could  get 
no  farther.  They  had  to  remain  where  they  were,  and  though  they  waited  and  waited, 
no  daylight  came.  In  the  meantime  they  made  a  fire  from  ite-palm  leaves,  but  it 
burned  away  too  quickly;  it  was  no  good.  They  then  rolled  some  wax  in  a  leaf, 
but  this  also  burned  away  too  quickly:  it  too  was  no  good.  The  parents,  seeing  a 
little  dawn  a  long  distance  away  in  the  bush,  sent  the  elder  daughter  to  go  and  bring 
it.  She  went  on  and  on,  but  zigzag  and  crossways  just  like  a  drunken  man,  a  token 
that  she  would  never  obtain  the  daylight.  She  walked  in  a  crooked  way  because  she 
had  abeady  had  dealings  with  a  man.  Finally  she  reached  the  spot  where  the  day- 
light was,  and  there  she  came  across  an  old  man  and  his  wife.  She  asked  for  his  son, 
but  as  he  was  out  at  work,  the  old  man  bade  her  to  wait.  When  at  last  the  old  man's 
son  did  reach  home,  the  mother  said :  '  'A  friend  has  come  to  see  you.  She  has  waited 
long.  Yqu  had  better  ask  her  what  she  wants. ' '  And  when  he  asked  her  what  she  wanted, 
she  told  him  how  her  father  had  sent  her  to  fetch  some  daylight.  [Extrahens  suum 
clavem,  incepit  arcam  intrare],  but  the  key'  would  not  fit,  the  lock'  having  been  tam- 
pered with,  and  he  therefore  sent  her  home  again.  When  she  got  back,  empty  handed, 
the  younger  sister  said,  "  I  will  try  to  get  some  daylight,"  and  although  her  father  told 
her  she  was  too  young  to  go,  she  insisted,  and  went.  She  did  not  stumble  on  the  road 
from  one  side  to  the  other  because  as  yet  she  had  never  had  anything  to  do  with  a  man, 
and  she  reached  the  spot  without  trouble.  Like  her  sister,  she  had  to  await  the  young 
man's  return,  and  when  he  did  arrive,  his  old  mother  said:  "I  don't  know  what  is  the 

1  When  I  reminded  the  old  Warrau  informant  that  Indians  had  no  locks  and  keys,  she  told  me  that 
the  story  as  told  above  Is  just  as  she  heard  It,  and  that  oldtlme  people  do  not  like  to  mention  "bad  (i.  e. 
indecent)  things.— W.  E.  R. 


BOTH]  THE   SPmiTS   OF   THE    SKY.  267 

matter  with  your  friends.  They  have  never  come  to  visit  you  like  this  before.  There 
is  another  young  woman  come  to  see  you."  On  learning  that  she  had  come  to  fetch 
daylight  [inseruit  clavem  in  arcam  eius  et  demon8tra\-it  quoquo  modo  opportuiese  uti]. 
He  gave  her  the  Daylight,  which  she  brought  back  to  her  parents  and  sister. 

[Among  the  Pareasi  (Peru)  there  is  a  vaginal  origin  ascribed  to  both  organic  and 
inorganic  nature  (PE,  33).] 

213.  Rain  can  be  produced  as  well  as  stopped  by  human,  animal, 
or  spirit  agency,  but  at  the  same  time  would  appear  to  hare  an  inde- 
pendent existence.  To  make  rain  on  the  Pomeroon,  one  of  the 
authorized  methods  consists  in  plunging  into  water  a  length  of  cas- 
sava stalk  held  at  one  extremity.  Next  the  stalk  must  be  tied  up  in 
the  center  of  a  bundle  of  other  cassava  stalks,  and  the  whole  left  to 
soak  in  water:  rain  is  sure  to  fall  within  twenty-four  hours.  Another 
method  practised  here  is  to  wash  in  water  the  scrapings  from  one  of  an 
alligator's  largest  teeth.  Arawaks  as  well  as  Warraus  believe  also  in 
the  piai  or  any  layman  burning  the  carcass  of  a  camudi  as  an  induce- 
ment for  the  rain  to  fall.  The  Oyambis  of  Cayenne  have  the  same 
belief  in  the  efficacy  of  the  killing  of  a  snake  (Cr,  174').  On  the 
Kamwatta  Creek,  in  the  Monica  River  district,  there  is  a  half-sub- 
merged tree  stump,  known  as  Ib6ma  Git-  "young  woman,"  in  the 
Waixau  language),  believed  to  be  the  site  where  either  an  Indian  mur- 
dered his  wife  or  where  she  killed  herself.  In  dry  wej^ther  the  tree  is 
exposed,  and  as  the  Indians  pass  it  in  their  corials,  they  call  out, 
"Ibtima ! "  and  slash  their  cutlasses  into  it,  with  the  avowed  purpose  of 
making  the  woman  vexed,  and  so  causing  the  rain  to  fall.  Rain  can 
also  be  made  to  fall  in  this  district  by  cursing  the  black  kurri-kurri  bird 
as  mentioned  in  the  story  of  the  Medicine-man  and  the  Carrion  Crows 
(Sect.  SOS).  On  the  upper  Mazaruni  it  is  a  large  eagle  and  a  camudi 
that  can  cause  the  rain  to  fall  (Bro,  399);  frogs  are  reputed  to  be 
able  to  do  the  same  thing  (Sect.  4^). 

214.  The  infringement  of  certain  taboos  can  also  entail  a  downpour 
of  rain.  For  instance,  when  traveling  on  the  sea  or  any  other  large 
sheet  of  water,  as  a  big  river,  the  Indians  (Arawaks,  Warraus,  etc.) 
have  to  be  very  careful  as  to  what  they  do  with  the  pot-spoon,  the 
hardro  of  the  Arawaks  (Sect.  19S).  After  use  they  must  wash  it  in  the 
traveling  boat  or  wait  imtU  they  get  on  land,  but  never  wash  it  in 
the  river  or  sea:  otherwise,  big  squalls  and  storms  will  arise.  Nor 
must  any  fresh  water  be  spilt  in  the  traveling  boat  (Sect.  219). 
Xear  the  Chichi  Falls,  upper  MazarUni,  on  giving  the  Indians  rice 
to  cook  that  evening,  the  men  told  them  to  wash  it  first  by  dipping 
the  earthen  pot  into  water,  but  to  this  they  demurred,  saying  that 
if  they  placed  their  pot  in  the  water  the  rain  would  fall  more  heavily 
(Bro,  397).  In  the  same  way  a  Cayenne  bush-negro,  in  order  to  stop 
the  rain,  advises  his  fellow-servant  not  to  wash  the  inside  of  the  pot 
(Cr,  276). 


268  ANIMISM   AND  FOLK-LOBE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS   [bth.  ann.30 

315.  Conversely,  the  rain  can  be  stopped.  Near  Mora  Village,  on 
the  upper  Rupununi,  there  was  a  hill  close  by  on  which,  the  Indian 
said,  a  "Spirit  at  the  approach  of  the  end  of  the  rainy  season,  made  a 
noise  like  the  report  of  a  gun  to  stop  the  rain"  (Bro,  138).  "We 
passed  an  old  man,"  says  Brett  (Br,  169),  "fishing  in  a  canoe  on  the 
Manawarin.  The  clouds  threatened  rain,  and  when  he  perceived  it, 
he  began  to  use  extraordinary  gesticulations,  floxirishing  his  arms, 
and  shouting  his  incantations  to  drive  it  away.  It  soon  cleared  up, 
and  the  old  sorcerer  rejoiced  at  his  success,  as  he  deemed  it."  So 
again,  Dance  (p.  234),  on  the  Potaro:  "A  cloud  was  gathering  wind- 
ward, and  threatened  rain.  The  Indian  who  had  the  front  paddle 
in  my  woodsMn  commenced  to  blow  away  the  threatening  rain  cloud. 
This  he  attempted  to  do  by  blowing  into  his  fist  and  dashing  his 
hand  upward  toward  the  cloud."  Schomburgk  describes  a  similar 
manoeuver  executed  by  a  Warrau  (ScR,  i,  186).  On  the  Pomeroon, 
should  rain  fall  at  a  time  when  it  is  particularly  not  desired,  as  when 
traveling  in  an  exposed  corial,  one  of  the  occupants  will  address  the 
' '  Boss ' '  Spirit  of  the  R  ain  somewhat  as  follows :  ' '  Pass  on.  We  don' t 
want  you  here.  Clear  out  to  the  head  of  the  river  where  you  are 
wanted,"  at  the  same  time  pointing  with  his  finger  toward  the  direc- 
tion he  wishes  it  to  take.  Another  of  the  occupants  will  as  often  as 
not  then  get  up' in  the  boat  on  all  fours  and,  pointing  his  posterior  in 
the  direction  of  the  Rain,  will  address  it  with  an  obscene  remark.  The 
Being  thus  addressed  is  Uni-shidu,  so  called  by  the  Arawaks  from  Uni, 
the  Rain,  and  Shidu,  a  term  applied  to  any  chief  or  boss.  As  first 
recorded  by  Bancroft  (312),  it  is  noteworthy  that  if  it  rains  at  the  time, 
the  medicine-man  will  postpone  his  incantations. 

316.  The  Arawaks  speak  of  the  Rainbow  as  Yawarri  (Didelphys 
sp.),  the  reddish  color  of  its  fur  bearing  some  fancied  resemblance 
to  the  coloration  of  the  bow.  These  same  people  (certainly  in  the 
Pomeroon  District)  hold  that  white  people  are  coming  from  the  direc- 
tion where  they  see  a  rainbow:  On  inquiry,  I  learn  that  the  con- 
nection between  this  natural  phenomenon  and  the  European  lies  in 
the  high  arched  forehead  of  the  latter.  The  Island  Caribs  more  or 
less  personified  it  as  Joulouca  [  'another  form  of  the  word  Yurokon, 
Sect.  94],  the  Rainbow  Spirit,  which  "lives  on  fish,  lizards,  pigeons, 
and  humming  birds,  and  is  covered  with  fine  feathers  of  all  colors, 
especially  on  the  head.  He  is  the  rain-bow  which  we  see:  the  clouds 
prevent  us  from  seeing  the  rest  of  the  body.  He  makes  the  Carib  ill 
when  it  finds  nothing  to  eat  above.  If  this  fine  Iris  appears  when 
they  are  at  sea,  they  take  it  as  a  good  omen  of  a  prosperous  journey. 
When  it  appears  to  them  while  they  are  on  land,  they  hide  in  their 
homes  and  think  that  it  is  a  strange  and  masterless  spirit  which  seeks 
to  Mil  somebody  "  (BBR,  231). 


BOTH]  THE   SPIRITS   OF    THE    SKY.  269 

217.  As  will  be  seen  from  the  following  list,  weather  forecasting 
must  be  somewhat  easy  for  the  Indians.  Unfortunately  I  have  been 
umable  to  discover  at  first  hand,  the  connection,  if  any,  between 
the  sign  and  the  event,  that  is,  whether  it  is  a  case  of  cause  and  effect, 
at  the  instigation  of  some  Spirit,  human  or  animal.  On  the  Monica 
River,  rain  will  fall  or  an  accident  of  some  sort  will  happen  to  the 
person  hearing  the  karra-suri  (small  kingfisher)  or  the  fiikar-wamia 
(a  little  bird  with  red  legs  and  its  long  tail)  whistle  notes;  so  again, 
certainly  on  the  same  river,  if  when  the  weather  happens  to  be  dry,  the 
kaiokochi  (crocodile)  "barks"  late  of  an  afternoon,  rain  is  certain  to 
follow  either  that  night  or  during  the  course  of  the  following  day. 
When  the  river  ibis,  or  kurri-kurri  (Ibis  infuscatus) ,  utters  its  cries  in 
the  evening,  the  natives  of  the  Cuyuni  say  it  is  a  sure  sign  that  rain 
will  fall  during  the  night  (Bro,  21).  Gumilla  makes  the  curious 
statement  (G,  i,  289)  that  the  manati  is  to  be  seen  taking  big  jumps 
out  of  the  water  a  day  before  rain  falls.  On  the  Pomeroon  and 
Moruca,  among  the  Arawaks,  when  plenty  of  swallows  are  seen,  or 
the  toucans  cry  loudly,  or  varioiis  frogs  (as  the  akura,  tontonU, 
kure-kure,  warra-raura)  are  heard,  or  a  little  insect  (the  kudu-kudu) 
chirps,  or  the  yarau  fish  are  found  bearing  plenty  of  e^s,  wet  weather 
is  believed  to  be  approaching.  In  Cayenne,  the  araqua  or  paraqua 
is  the  rain-bird  of  the  Ouajana  Indians.  A  long  spell  of  dry  weather 
may  be  expected  when  any  large  camudi  is  found  high  up  on  a  tree, 
and  a  correspondingly  short  one  if  the  serpent  is  but  a  small  one  and 
only  a  few  feet  from  the  groimd  (Arawaks  and  Warraus,  Moruca 
River).  Again,  if  a  Pomeroon  Arawak  hears  the  kukui  (a  hawk  some- 
what hke  a  'carrion  crow')  he  knows  the  soimd  presages  prolonged 
dry  weather;  what  is  more  curious  still,  he  and  his  people  when  they 
hear  this  sound  rush  to  the  pepper  trees  around  the  house  and  shake 
them  with  a  view  to  making  them  bear  more  peppers.  There  are 
two  birds  that  I  shall  always  be  glad  to  hear  singing,  the  warri-kuma 
and  the  dara  ('bell-bird,"  Chasmarhynchus) ,  because  the  Arawaks 
have  taught  me  that  they  indicate  the  coming  of  plenty  of  sunshine. 
Some  Indians  enjoy  the  same  prospect  when  they  hear  the  baboon 
howling. 

218.  The  Cayeifhe  Indians  are  not  so  much  afraid  of  thunder  as 
of  an  ecUpse:  they  believe  the  former  is  caused  by  piai  who,  climbing 
up  into  the  skies,  makes  this  frightful  noise  (PBa,  233).  As  soon  as 
they  recognize  the  approaching  storm  which  usually  accompanies  the 
thunder,  the  Island  Caribs  at  once  make  for  their  houses,  and  stepping 
into  the  kitchen,  seat  themselves  on  their  Uttle  stools  close  to  the 
fire.  Here,  hiding  their  faces,  and  resting  their  heads  upon  their 
hands  and  knees,  they  commence  to  cry,  bewailing  in  their  gibberish 
that  Maboya  (Sect.  84)  is  much  angered  with  them.  They  do  the 
same  thing  when  there  is  a  hurricane  on  (RoP,  486).     The  Uaupes 


270  ANIMISM   AND   FOLK-LOKE   OF   GXHANA  INDIANS   [bth.  akn.  30 

River  Indians  blame  their  corresponding  spirit,  the  Jurupari,  for 
the  thunderstormsj  it  is  at  these  times  that  he  is  angry  mth  them 
(ARW,  348).  The  Kob6uas  beheve  that  at  death  separation  of  spirit 
from  body  is  taking  place  (KG,  n,  152).  Warraus  believe  thvmder 
to  be  the  roar  of  Black  Tiger  (Sect.  IJiS).  The  Surinam  negroes 
regard  the  old-time  Indian  stone  weapons  as  thunderbolts,  and  look 
on  them  as  talismans  with  which  they  part  only  with  reluctance  (WJ, 
71).  Many  people  [^Indians,  ?Spaniards]  at  Caracas  and  elsewhere 
wear  them  on  their  necks  as  amulets  for  protection  against  light- 
ning and  thunder  (AR,  461). 

319.  With  regard  to  storms  generally,  the  Carib  Islanders — 

When  they  have  to  cross  over  sea  to  go  to  another  island  like  St.  Alousi  or  St.  Vin- 
cent ...  no  pure  water  is  drunk,  and  they  are  very  careful  not  to  spill  any  in  the 
canoe  or  in  the  sea  (Sect.  193);  it  would  cause  the  sea  to  swell  and  make  rain  and  bad 
weather  come.  .  .  .  They  cannot  pass  certain  places  at  sea  without  throwing  over 
food:  it  is  for  some  Caribs  who  have  perished  there,  and  now  have  their  huts  at  the 
bottom  of  the  sea.  They  could  otherwise  not  pass  without  the  boat  capsizing.  When 
a  storm  cloud  is  seen,  they  all  blow  in  the  air  and  drive  it  away  with  their  hands  to 
turn  the  rain  in  another  direction.  To  make  the  sea  calm,  and  allay  a  storm,  they 
chew  cassava,  then  spit  it  in  the  air  and  sea  to  appease  the  Chemeen  (Sect.  59)  who  is 
perhaps  angry  because  he  is  hungry.  If  they  have  an  unfavorable  wind,  an  old  man 
out  of  the  crowd  takes  an  arrow  and  hits  the  hydrant  of  the  canoe,  which  is  supposed 
to  let  the  canoe  go  as  straight  as  an  arrow:  if  a  gust  of  wind  makes  them  lose  sight  of 
land,  they  consult  the  devil.     [BBR,  245.] 


Chapter  XIV 
OMENS,  CHARMS,  TALISMANS 

Omens,  tokens,  auguries,  etc.,  dependent  on — hutnan  beings  {2i0-ttl);  quadrupeds 
(2«*);  birds  {tiS);  insects  (224-^25);  plants  (256).  Ordeals,  Preparatory  Charms,  for 
the  Chase,  with:  Incisions,  mutilations,  nose-stringing  (227);  frogs,  toads  {iiS-?29); 
caterpillars  and  ants  {SSO);  perhaps  have  a  physiolc^cal  basis  {2S1).  TTiinting-dngs 
have  to  undergo  similar  ordeals  (iJ2).  Attraction  charms,  Binas  (1)  for  hunting: 
Plants,  used  on  hunter  (2J5),  or  on  his  dog  {i34),  originally  obtained  from  a  snake  {gS5). 
Animals  used  on  the  hunter  and  on  his  dc^  (2<}6);  (-)  for  sexual  purposes:  Plants 
{iS7)\  animxds  (JiSS).  Talismans,  Repellent  (and  so  Protective  or  Defensive) Charms: 
Plant  {iS9),  animal,  tooth  (2-W>),  blood  and  red  paint  {240A),  stone  (t41). 

230.  Omens,  tokens,  auguries,  etc.,  are  known  to  the  Arawaks  as 
adiJmahu,  to  the  Warraus  as  asijatav-aha.  Lucky  indeed  are  those 
children  who  are  born  with  a  caul  (shibo-addahu) ,  because  they  are 
going  to  see  spirits  (Yawahu)  and  so  become  more  clever.  If  the 
husband  is  away  fishing  or  htmting,  and  any  Uttle  child  of  his,  boy 
or  girl,  takes  up  a  pot,  and  puts  it  on  the  fire  pretending  to  cook  some- 
thing (leaves,  etc.))  the  mothe.-  can  rest  assured  that  their  father  is 
bringing  something  home  with  him.  If  a  healthy  person  is  suddenly 
overcome  by  a  sleepy  feeling,  or  if  during  sleep  he  happens  to  spit, 
this  means  that  he  is  about  to  be  visited  by  some  one  (Arawaks). 
During  sneezing  and  yawning,  the  spirit  temporarily  leaves  the  body 
through  nose  and  mouth  (KG,  n,  152).  To  point  the  finger  at  a 
fellow  creature  (Sect.  S6S)  is  to  ofiFer  him  as  serious  an  affront  as  it 
wotild  be  to  step  over  him  when  l3?ing  on  the  groimd;  in  the  latter 
case,  the  recumbent  person  would  rightly  say,  "You  can  cross  me 
when  I  am  dead.  I  am  not  dead  yet!''  (Arawaks).  Our  old  chief- 
tain, says  Schombui^k,  had  during  the  morning  sprained  his  foot, 
while  jumping  from  rock  to  rock,  an  accident  to  which  he  paid  little 
attention,  but  which  showed  he  was  unable  to  proceed  on  the  journey 
to  Nappi:  this  accident  was  taken  as  a  bad  omen  by  both  the  Makusis 
and  Arekimas  who,  with  the  exception  of  those  who  were  bound  to 
us  by  agreement,  all  turned  back  to  their  settlement  on  the  following 
morning  (ScR,  n,  291).  If  the  occupants  of  a  settlement  [Pomeroon 
Caribs]  wish  to  assure  the  victory  for  their  warriors  on  the  march, 
and  want  to  assure  themselves  at  the  same  time  of  the  issue  of  the 
battle,  perhaps  already  fought,  they  place  two  boys  on  a  bench  and 
whip  them  without  mercy,  especially  over  the  shoulders.  If  the  boys 
bear  the  pain  without  shedding  a  tear  or  uttering  a  groan,  victory  is 
certain.  One  of  the  boys  is  then  placed  in  a  hammock,  from  which 
he  has  to  shoot  at  a  target  fixed  to  one  of  the  roofs:  as  many  arrows 

271 


272  ANIMISM   AND   FOLK-LOHE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS   [eth.  ann.30 

as  hit  the  target,  so  many  of  the  enemy  ^tII  be  killed  by  the  ^'arriors 
(ScR,  n,  431).  If  after  their  descent  upon  the  Arawaks,  they  are  dis- 
covered before  striking  the  first  blow,  or  a  dog  yelps  at  them,  the 
Island  Caribs  take  the  incident  for  a  bad  augury,  and  retmn  to 
their  boats;  they  beHeve  that  hostilities,  begun  openly,  will  not  suc- 
ceed (EoP,  529). 

231.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  anything  that  occm-s  out  of  the  ordinary 
is  accepted  in  the  light  of  a  token  of  something  evU  about  to  happen. 
For  examples  of  this,  I  am  taking  at  random  the  following  extracts 
from  the  legends  already  given: 

He  brought  tiem  a  turtle,  which  they  put  on  the  hot  ashes  without  killing  it,  so  it 
promptly  crawled  out;  they  pushed  it  on  again,  but  with  the  same  result.  It  was  tlie 
omen  betokening  their  death  [Sect.  4]- 

And  when  asked  how  she  knew  [that  the  Bush  Spirits  were  coming  to  spoil  the 
drink],  she  told  them  that  she  had  received  a  sign,  or  token,  because  when  she  was 
weeping  for  her  late  husband,  he  suddenly  appeared  before  her  and  told  her  to  cease  to 
cry  [Sect.  109], 

The  elder  brother  then  recognized  that  it  [the  fact  of  the  younger  persistently  moHnjr 
a  noise  while  fishing]  was  a  token  of  something  that  was  about  to  happen  [Sect.  llS], 

The  wife  also  met  her  death  shortly  after,  and  they  then  remembered  having  noticed 
the  token:  she  had  omitted  to  bathe  after  a  meal,  some  days  before  (Sect.  119). 

Her  visitor  eating  the  frogs  raw  was  a  sign  of  something  wrong  somewhere,  causing 
the  girl  to  become  suspicious  (Sect.  liO). 

It  was  not  long  Ijefore  the  brother  again  put  his  feet  into  the  fire,  a  fact  which,  con- 
sidering that  he  was  not  drunk,  led  his  brother  to  believe  that  it  was  a  token  of  some 
evil  about  to  befall  (Sect.  126). 

When  the  husband  claimed  the  beast  which  he  had  not  hilled,  as  his  own,  the  wife 
realized  the  token  that  something  unusual  was  about  to  happen  (Sect.  1S6). 

While  eating  the  beetle  grub  out  of  the  Mauritia  palm,  the  elder  brother  heard  it 
whistle:  he  knew  this  to  be  the  sign  or  token  that  he  was  about  to  die  (Sect.  1S9). 

331A.  The  token  or  augury  may  be  in  the  nature  of  an  indescribable 
sort  of  feeling. 

The  Obstinate  Girl  who  Refused  the  Old  ;Man  (W) 

An  old  man  asked  a  woman  to  come  and  live  with  him.  She,  however,  was  young 
and  wanted  a  yoimger  husband,  so  she  declined  him.  This  made  the  old  man  much 
vexed,  and  he  threatened  to  punish  her  badly.  By  and  by  the  woman  took  as  hus- 
band a  young  man.  He  was  a  splendid  hunter,  and  always  killed  anything  and 
everything;  even  at  night,  if  he  heard  a  tiger  growling  anjni(rhere  in  the  neighbor^ 
hood,  he  would  never  hesitate  to  go  out  Into  the  darkness  and  slay  it.  One  day  he 
went  into  the  bush  to  cut  out  honey,  his  wife  accompanying  him.  "That  will  do," 
she  said  when  she  thought  he  had  cut  enough,  but  he  wanted  to  cut  one  more  tree. 
"No,  don't  cut  another,"  she  repeated,  "I  feel  frightened.  I  feel  strange,  as  if  some- 
thing were  about  to  happen."  '  But  he  insisted  upon  cutting  one  tree  more,  and  no 
sooner  had  he  done  so  than  two  creatures  like  tigers  rushed  out  of  a  neighboring  thicket 
and  killed  him.  They  were  not  exactly  Hebus,  and  they  were  not  exactly  tigers: 
they  were  Spirits  of  some  sort  whom  the  old  man  had  sent  to.revenge  himself  with. 
Now  the  deceased  husband  had  left  two  brothers  behind  him,  and  when  they  heard 
of  his  death,  they  made  inquiry  and  examined  the  place  in  the  forest  where  he  had 

1  This  was  really  tha  token. 


BOTH)  OMENS,  CHABMS,  TALISMANS  273 

been  attacked,  but  could  find  no  trace  of  the  bddy .  The  young  widow  then  wanted  to 
take  unto  herself  one  of  these  brothers-in-law,  but  he  was  afraid  after  what  had  hap- 
pened to  her  first  husband.  Nevertheless,  she  loosened  her  hammock,  and  slung  it 
next  to  his;  she  even  brought  him  food,  water,  and  other  things,  but  he  refused  to 
handle  anything  that  she  offered.  Had  he  done  so,  she  would  have  said  to  herself, 
"He  loves  me"  [Sect.  *75].  Nevertheless,  she  persisted  in  her  attentions,  and  fol- 
lowed him  everywhere;  where  he  went,  she  went.  He  told  her  he  was  going  to  cut 
out  honey  and  that  she  must  go  back;  she  refused,  so  he  threw  her  into  the  river. 
She  did  not  mind,  but  climg  to  the  edge  of  the  corial,  and  though  he  bashed  her  fingers 
with  the  paddle,  she  refused  to  let  go  her  hold — well,  at  last  he  gave  way  and  let  her 
join  him.  So  they  went  together  to  the  place  where  the  honey  was  to  be  procured, 
and  filled  all  their  goblets.  The  woman  said,  "Bon't  cut  any  more.  I  feel  strange. 
Something  ia  about  to  happen."  He  stopped  cutting,  and  helped  to  pack  the  coriaT 
ready  for  the  return  journey.  While  doing  so,  the  two  Tiger  creatures  came  from  out 
of  their  hiding-place  and  killed  him.  And  the  woman  was  for  the  second  time  a 
widow.  The  remaining  brother  and  other  members  of  the  family  came  and  visited 
the  spot  as  before,  but  there  was  no  trace  of  the  body  to  be  found.  It  was  this  remaining 
brother  that  the  woman  next  wanted,  but  after  what  had  happened,  he  was  too  much 
afraid  to  have  anjrthing  whatever  to  do  with  her.  However,  she  persisted  so  much,  that 
he  was  finally  forced  to  consent.  They  went  for  the  honey  as  before,  the  strange 
feeling  came  over  her,  she  warned  him  to  stop,  they  started  packing,  and  the  two 
Tiger  creatures  appeared.  On  this  occasion,  the  man  killed  one  of  his  assailants  before 
being  himself  dispatched  by  the  other.  At  any  rate,  the  woman  was  for  the  third 
time  a  widow.  Did  she  then  marry  the  old  man  who  wanted  her  originally?  No; 
she  would  not  even  look  at  him. 

221B.  How  THE  Little  Bot  Escaped  feom  the  Cakibs  (W) 

A  party  of  women  and  girls  went  to  gather  wild  pineapple.  They  traveled  in  a  large 
corial,  and  at  last  landed.  Having  roamed  the  bush  and  gathered  a  number  of  pines, 
they  all  sat  down  in  a  circle  to  eat  them,  and  commenced  laughing  and  chattering, 
as  women  do.  Now  there  was  a  little  boy  among  the  party,  who  climbed  up  an  over- 
hanging tree,  where  the  corial  had  been  tied  up  at  the  water-side,  in  order  to  keep 
watch;  he  was  afraid  that  something  was  going  to  happen.'  After  a  while  he  called 
out  that  some  men  were  swimming  across  the  stream,  but  all  that  the  women  jokingly 
said  was:  "AU  right.  Let  them  come.  We  will  have  some  sport  and  fun  with  them." 
But  the  men  were  really  Carib  cannibals,  and  as  soon  as  they  reached  land,  they 
rushed  upon  the  women,  slaughtered  every  one  of  them,  and  b^an  cooking  the 
flesh.  The  boy  up  the  tree  was  much  frightened  at  seeing  all  this,  but  did  not  dare 
descend  just  yet.  The  Caribs  were  watching  the  corial  lest  anyone  shoidd  come  and 
fetch  it  away,  and  at  irregular  intervals  would  wander  backward  and  forward  from 
the  scene  of  the  outrage  to  the  landing-place.  It  was  during  one  of  these  inter\-als  that 
the  yovmgster  slipped  down  the  tree,  and,  breaking  his  arrow,  nibbed  the  pieces 
over  his  body  to  make  him  brave  [Sect.  SSI].  He  then  slipped  off  into  the  corial, 
and  as  quickly  as  possible  reached  midstream.  By  this  time  the  Caribs  had  recog- 
nized him  and  shouted  for  him  to  return.  "Comeback!  Come  back!  "they  screamed: 
"Your  sister  is  alive  and  calls  you,"  but  the  lad  knew  better  and,  paddMng  strongly, 
got  home  safe.  He  told  his  father  and  other  relatives  all  that  had  happened.  These 
hurried  back,  only  to  find  that  the  Caribs  had  made  their  escape,  and  so  they  "received 
no  payment "  [i.  e.  they  did  not  get  their  revenge  on  them].' 

1  When  I  asked  the  narrator  how  the  little  boy  knew  that  something  exceptional  was  about  to  take  place, 
she  told  me  that  when  young  people  and  children  tra-rel  far  afield,  they  often  get  tnghtened  and  nervous.— 

W.E.  K. 
1  For  another  Warrau  version  of  this  story,  see  Sect.  147. 

ir.oei* — 30  ETH — 1."> 18 


274  ANIMISM   AND  FOLK-LOKE   OP   GUIANA  INDIANS    [eth.ann.  30 

332.  With  regard  to  animals,'  let  us  see  what  they  or  their  actions 
can  presage. 

Serious  sickness  or  death  is  indicated  by  either  small  or  large 
species  of  armadillo  (yeshi  and  monoraima,  respectively),  or  the 
jaguar,  bin-rowing  or  digging  up,  for  the  purpose  of  covering  its 
excreta,  any  portion  of  the  road  leading  up  to  the  house.  Similarly, 
it  is  a  bad  omen  for  any  droppings  of  the  buhurri  (a  bat)  to  be  found 
on  the  pathway  (Arawaks) .  There  is  a  frog  with  a  spotted  back  which 
jumps  well,  and  is  known  to  the  Pomeroon  Arawaks  as  sorukara.  A 
pregnant  woman  will  tickle  it  to  make  it  jump,  and  according  as  it 
lands  on  its  back  or  its  belly,  so  will  her  child  prove  to  be  girl  or  boy. 
The  Island  Caribs  regarded  bats  as  their  guardian  Chemeens  or 
FamiUar  Spirits,  and  believed  that  whoever  lolled  them  would  become 
ill  (BBR,  235).  When  the  warritimakaro  {Bradypus  tridactylus),  the 
smallest  kind  of  sloth,  which  has  a  curious  habit  of  always  covering 
its  face  with  its  crossed  hands,  uncovers  its  face,  it  is  a  sure  token  that 
some  one  is  going  to  die  (Arawaks). 

333.  Birds  of  ill  omen  are  present  in  plenty.     Chief  among  these  is 
■  the  goat-sucker  (Caprimulgus).     Writing  from  the  Takutu,  Schom- 

burgk  says  that — 

The  Indians  have  the  greatest  superstition  with  regard  to  this  bird,  and  would  not 
kill  it  for  any  price.  They  say  it  keeps  communication  with  the  dead,  and  brings 
messages  to  their  conjurers.  Even  the  common  people  on  the  coast  retain  in  a  great 
measure  this  superstition,  and  hold  the  bird  in  great  awe.  Its  nocturnal  habits,  the 
swiftness  and  peculiarity  of  its  flight,  and  its  note,  which  breaks  the  silence  of  the 
night,  have  no  doubt  contributed  to  the  fear  which  Indians  and  Creoles  entertain 
for  the'Wacarai  or  Sumpy  Bird  [ScT,  67]. 

As  is  the  case  with  even  far  more  civilized  nations,  owls  are  of 
equally  evil  portent  and  may  indicate  sickness,  death,*  the  presence  of 
an  as-yet-unborn  babe,  or  a  birth.  Thus,  among  the  Pomeroon  and 
Moruca  Arawaks,  the  boku-boku,  and  the  waro-baiya  or  maletitoro 
(both  of  them  species  of  night-owl),  and  among  the  Demerara  River 
Arawaks,  the  hututu  (night-owl)  and  makudi  (small  owl)  are  said 
always  to  be  heard  when  a  person  is  sick  or  about  to  die.  In  the 
Pomeroon  the  morokodyi  (night-owl)  cries  when  a  female  in  the 
house  is  enciente.  On  the  Demerara,  when  the  night-owl  calls 
cuta!  cuta!  cuta!  quickly,  it  is  to  notify  that  one  in  the  family  is  about 
to  give  birth  to  a  child;  and  when  that  bird  mews  like  a  cat,  it  is  the 
notification  of  death  (Da,  269).  In  French  Guiana,  on  the  upper 
Parou  River,  at  an  Apalai  village,  Cr6vaux  had  a  curious  experience: 
"Arrived  in  the  forest  where  we  proposed  camping,  we  heard  the  notes 
of  a  bird  which  I  have  reason  to  believe  is  a  kind  of  screech-owl.  A 
panic  seized  my  escort,  the  torches  were  put  out,  and  men  and  women 
saved  themselves  in  the  obscurity  of  the  night.  We  were  obUged  to 
return  to  the  village  for  our  night's  rest"  (Cr,300).    OnthePomeroon 


BOTH]  OMENS,   CHAKMS,   TALISMANS  275 

and  elsewhere,  probably  from  their  ciistom,  when  in  lai^e  numbers, 
of  flying  in  pairs,  one  behind  the  other,  the  baridi  hawks  are  taken 
as  an  omen  of  a  fimeral.  On  the  lower  Amazon,  a  black  eagle 
{MUvago  nvdicoUis)  locally  known  as  the  carac&ra-i,  is  considered  a 
bird  of  Ul-omen  by  the  Indians;  it  often  perches  on  the  tops  of  trees  in 
the  neighborhood  of  their  huts  and  is  then  said  to  bring  a  warning 
of  death  to  some  member  of  the  household.  Some  say  that  its  whin- 
ing cry  is  intended  to  attract  defenceless  birds  within  its  reach 
(HWB,  146).  With  regard  to  remaining  species  of  birds,  the  Pome- 
roon  Arawaks  beheve  that  if  the  koko-bero  flies  over  the  house,  some 
one  in  it  will  shortly  prove  pregnant,  that  or  a  Uttle  baby  is  about  to 
be  taken  sick.  The  voice  of  the  kwar-kwarra  brings  an  evil  message, 
similar  to  that  of  the  boku-boku.  The  kar6o-obannahu  is  a  small 
night-bird,  so  named  after  its  note,  Icarau!  Jcarau!  and  obanndhu  (the 
liver,  the  color  of  which  it  resembles).  If  its  note  is  heard  but 
faintly,  some  individual  must  be  exceedingly  ill:  if  distinctly,  the 
patient  is  getting  better  and  stronger.  When  the  beletika  cries,  some 
one  is  about  to  be  married;  hence  this  token  may  be  both  of  good 
and  bad  omen.  Another  set  of  bird-tokens  may  indicate  approaching 
rainfall  as  well  as  accident  (Sect.  £17).  There  is  still  another  class  of 
omens,  indicative  of  either  prospective  good  luck  or  bad  luck.  Thus, 
when  on  a  hunting  expedition,  one  hears  the  karrasuri,  a  small  bird, 
uttering  a  kind  of  laugh,  he  is  sure  to  kill  something,  but  if  it  should 
cry  shirai,  he  will  get  nothing.  According  as  the  bukulaura,  another 
bird,  turns  its  back  or  its  breast  toward  a  person,  so  will  fortune  or 
misfortune  attend  that  person's  wishes  in  obtaining  whatever  food 
he  wants.  [Furthermore,  when  walking  along  the  pathway  one  must 
not  mind  if  a  munirikuti  (species  of  black  ant)  bites  his  foot,  because 
this  means  that  he  will  obtain  something  very  good  and  satisfying.] 
Some  Indians  will  never  turn  their  back  on  a  trogon :  "  He  [the  Indian] 
attributed  his  safety  (from  drowning)  to  the  strictness  with  which  the 
Indians  had  observed  the  proper  respect  due  to  a  trogon  that  had 
flown  over  our  heads  in  the  morning:  they  have  a  superstition  that 
if,  on  setting  out  on  a  journey,  they  should  turn  their  backs  to  this 
species  of  bird,  ill  luck  will  surely  foUow."  (BW,  146:  on  the  Maza- 
runi,  with  an  Arawak  and  Akawai  crew.)  The  following  are  some 
miscellaneous  examples  of  bird-omens:  On  the  Pomeroon  one  must 
not  gaze  too  long  on  the  great  red  macaw,  imless  the  individual  wishes 
to  become  bald,  presumably  in  view  of  the  bird  having  its  cheeks  so 
markedly  devoid  of  feathers.  The  advent  of  strangers  is  notified  by 
the  warracabba  (trimipeter-bird)  when  it  is  seen  playing  about  near 
the  house,  having  in  its  mouth  a  leaf  with  which  it  is  beheved  to  be 
building  a  banab.  On  the  Orinoco,  in  token  of  the  Father  coming 
to  visit  them,  the  Cacique  said  that  on  the  previous  day  he  had  seen  a 
bird  with  pecuhar  feathers  and  colors  passing  over  his  house:  it  gave 


276  ANIMISM   AND  ^OLK-LOfiE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS    [bth.ann.SO 

them  notice  of  his  approach  (G,  i,  311).  Children  are  discouraged 
from  picking  up  certain  feathers,  as  these  tend  to  weaken  memory, 
and  the  handling  of  the  feathers  of  a  scissor-tail  hawk,  called  by  the 
Atorais  chaouneh,  conduces  to  insanity  (Da,  250). 

3;33A.  The  Night-owl  and  his  Bat  Brothers-in-law  (W) 

Boku-boku,  the  Night-owl,  married  the  bats'  sister,  and  often  took  his  brothers  with 
him  at  night  to  rob  peoples'  houses.  One  night  they  came  across  a  house  where  the 
people  were  drying  fish  on  a  babracote:  just  to  frighten  them,  they  all  sang  out,  bohiU 
bohu!  bohul — thia  made  the  occupants  run  out  into  the  bush,  and  so  gave  the  bats 
their  opportunity  for  stealing  the  fish.  The  trio  played  the  same  trick  at  many  a 
settlement,  until  one  day  the  owl  t«Id  them  he  had  to  travel  about  for  a  while,  and 
that  during  his  absence  they  must  behave  themselves,  and  stay  indoors  at  night,  as 
otherwise  trouble  would  be  sure  to  happen.  But  no  sooner  had  Boku-boku  turned 
his  back,  than  the  bats,  imable  to  resist  temptation,  continued  their  evil  courses. 
They  got  to  a  place  one  night  where  the  fish  were  being  dried,  but  having  no  owl  with 
them  on  this  occasion,  they  could  not  shout  hohvJ  bohvJ  bohu!  as  loudly  as  they 
did  before;  hence,  the  people  not  being  so  frightened  now,  ran  away  only  a  little 
distance,  just  far  enough  to  be  able  to  watch  everything  and  to  see  that  it  was  only  the 
bats  who  were  stealing  their  food.  But  the  bats,  remaining  undisturbed,  thought 
they  could  now  do  what  they  liked  with  impunity,  and  hence  returned  again  upon 
the  following  evening,  when  the  people  remained  just  as  they  were,  some  seated, 
some  lying  in  their  hammocks.  The  bats  still  thought  of  course  tliat  nothing  bad 
could  happen  them,  and  were  laughing  (MI  chi!  chi!  for  very  joy.  But  the  house- 
master took  out  his  bow  aad  arrow,  the  latter  tipped  with  a  knob  of  wax,  with  which 
he  shot  one  of  them  on  the  rump,  stunning  it.^  The  other  bat,  escaping  into  the 
forest,  met  Boku-boku,  who  had  just  returned  from  his  travels,  and  to  whom  he  nar- 
rated the  circmnstances  of  his  brother's  untimely  death.  Nothing  daunted,  the  two 
returned  to  hunt  that  night,  and  on  this  occasion  the  noise  of  their  voices,  now  that  it 
included  the  owl's,  created  such  a  stir  that  the  folk  ran  as  before  into  the  bush,  while 
Boku-boku  and  his  brother-in-law  stole  the  fish.  But  lying  on  the  babracote  was 
the  dead  bat,  which  they  took  home  with  them,  and  there  they  soundly  smacked 
him  on  the  spot  where  he  had  been  struck  with  the  arrow:  this  brought  him  round,  the 
fire  not  having  withered  him  up  beyond  recovery,  and  he  laughed  chi/  chi/  chi!  on 
awakening.  And  although  Boku-boku  was  prevented  accompanying  them  the 
following  evening,  the  two  bats  insisted  on  repeating  their  nocturnal  excursion:  as 
before,  the  folk  were  not  frightened,  and  again  one  of  the  bats  got  shot  in  his  posterior. 
Next  night,  the  surviving  bat  returned  with  Boku-boku,  and  they  found  as  before  upon, 
the  babracote,  the  body  of  their  relative:  this  they  took  away  with  them,  but  on  this 
occasion,  when  they  smacked  the  corpse,  it  never  woke — ^it  had  been  dried  too  much 
over  the  fire.  The  surviving  bat  however  continues  to  take  his  revenge  u  pon  people 
and  sucks  them  and  their  fowls,  as  well  as  doing  other  damage,  while  the  presence  of 
Boku-boku,  his  brother-in-law,  invariably  means  mischief:  when  heard  at  night, 
some  one  is  surely  about  to  sicken  and  die. 

334.  There  are  two  bees  which  indicate  the  arrival  of  a  stranger. 
One  of  these  insects  (honorari)  comes  in  the  morning  early,  and  in 
the  afternoon  late,  while  the  other  (wariro)  Uves  in  the  ground; 
when  either  of  these  buzzes  Arawaks  are  convinced  that  people  are 
about  to  visit  them.     The  modudu  is  another  bee  that  flies  round 


I  On  the  upper  Aiary  the  children's  toy  arrows  are  tipped  with  a  button  of  black  wax  (KG,  i,  106-7). 


BOTH]  OMENS,   CHAKMS,   TALISMANS  277 

somewhere  between  4  and  5  a.  m.:  should  a  young  person  hear  it 
buzzing  he  (or  she)  must  immediately  get  out  of  the  hammock,  on 
penalty  of  having  pains  all  over  the  body.  The  Arawaks  of  the 
Pomeroon  believe  that  if  a  candle-fly,  Pyrophorus  noclilucus  (koko-i) 
is  seen  coming  into  the  house,  it  may  mean  three  things:  supposing 
it  falls  to  the  ground,  this  indicates  the  near  death  of  one  of  the 
inmates;  if  it  falls  into  the  fire,  this  shows  that  a  deer  has  sent  it 
along  to  fetch  a  light  for  him;  but  if  it  settles  down  under  the  roof, 
the  arrival  of  a  stranger  is  to  be  expected.  The  bite  of  a  certain  ant 
is  lucky  (Sect.  22S). 

225.  The  Candle-fly  saved  the  Lost  Hunter  (C) 

Five  men  fonned  themselves  into  a  hunting  party,  and  went  out  into  the  forest. 
At  nightfall  they  built  themselves  a  banab,  and  next  morning  they  all  started  in 
different  directions  to  scour  the  neighborhood.  Late  in  the  afternoon  they  had 
returned  to  the  resting  place,  all  except  one.  Three  of  the  four  said,  "Our  friend  is 
either  lost  or  a  tiger  has  eaten  him,"  but  when  they  discussed  the  matter  further, 
they  remembered  that  they  had  seen  no  tracks  of  a  tiger  throughout  the  district. 
The  head-man  was  therefore  right  when  he  said,  "No.  He  must  be  lost."  This 
was  really  what  had  happened  to  the  fifth  man,  who,  penetrating  deep  into  the  forest, 
was  overtaken  by  the  darkness,  which  made  him  miss  the  track.  He  wandered  on 
and  on,  and  laid  himself  down  under  a  tree.  By  and  by,  a  Pu-yu  [candle-fly]  came 
along  and  asked  him  what  he  was  doing  all  alone  there:  when  it  learned  that  he  had 
lost  himself,  it  offered  to  show  him  the  way.  But  the  man  doubted  how  such  a  little 
thing  could  help  him,  and  it  was  only  when  the  Candle-fly  told  him  that  it  intended 
wanning  itself  at  the  very  fire  which  his  four  friends  had  made  at  the  banab,  that 
he  agreed  to  follow  it.  And  as  the  two  approached  the  camping-ground,  they  heard 
the  voices  of  people  talking.  "Listen!"  said  the  little  Fly:  "That's  where  your 
people  are.  We  are  going  there."  WTien  they  at  last  reached  the  shed,  the  Candle- 
fly  flew  in  ahead,  and  told  the  four  men  that  it  was  bringing  them  their  lost  com- 
>panion;  the  latter  then  came  in,  and  his  four  friends  were  right  glad  to  see  him. 

226.  The  only  example  of  plant-life  in  connection  with  omens  and 
auguries  so  far  met  with  is  that  recorded  by  Bernau:  "Marriage  is 
frequently  contracted  by  parents  for  their  children  when  infants; 
and  trees  are  planted  by  the  respective  parties  in  witness  thereof: 
it  is  considered  a  bad  omen  if  either  tree  should  happen  to  wither 
as  in  that  case  the  party  is  sm-e  to  die"  (Be,  59). 

227.  The  Guiana  Indian  voluntarily  submits  to  various  painful 
ordeals  or  preparatory  charms,  previous  to  setting  out  on,  and  with 
t^e  object  of  winning  success  in,  the  chase.  He  beUeves  in  priming 
himself  whenever  his  hunting  powers  appear  to  be  impaired,  and  may 
spend  some  two  or  three  months  or  more  in  the  process;  during  this 
period  he  abstains  from  salt  and  peppers,  also  perhaps  from  sugar. 
The  ordeals  apparently  consist  in  the  "mortification  of  the  flesh" 
by  scarification,  etc.,  and  its  irritation  with  various  frogs,  toads, 
caterpillars,  ants,  or  by  special  nose-stringing  apparatus.  I  pur- 
posely use  the  term  "apparently"  because  their  real  signification 


278  ANIMISM  AND  FOLK-LOEE  OF   GUIANA  INDIANS   [eth.ann.30 

(see  Sect.  2S1)  is  evidently  not  even  known  to  the  Indians  who 
practise  them.  In  Surinam,  among  both  the  Ojanas  (Caribs)  and 
Trios  (Caribs)  it  is  customary  (Go,  21)  to  slash  arms  and  legs  with 
a  knife,  and  the  scars  may  be  rubbed  perhaps  with  tiu-alla  (Caladium 
bulb).  An  Ojana  told  de  Groeje  that  he  cut  his  arm  in  order  to  be 
able  to  shoot  the  quatta  monkey  well.  A  Trio  slashed  his  arm  and 
forearm  and  rubbed  earth  into  it,  to  become  a  good  hunter;  another 
cut  his  thigh  in  order  to  become  a  strong  mountain  climber;  some 
women  also  had  on  the  outer  side  of  the  thigh  scars  from  wounds 
inflicted  to  make  themselves  strong.  With  the  Island  Caribs,  the  fore- 
head and  nose  were  flattened  artificially  (RoP,  437).  This  was  done 
as  soon  as  the  infants  were  born  by  exerting  pressure  in  such  a  way 
as  to  cause  a  shght  backward  slope  of  this  part  of  the  head.  Besides 
being  considered  a  sign  of  beauty,  this  shape  was  said  to  be  advantage- 
ous in  shooting  arrows  from  a  tree-top,  in  securing  a  foot-hold,  etc. 
(RoP,  552).  Among  the  Yaruro  Indians  of  the  Orinoco,  in  order  to 
become  skillful  with  the  bow  and  arrow  the  men  submit  to  a  sexual 
mutilation  with  a  sting-ray  "barb",  which  is  made  to  pierce  the 
prepuce  (Cr,  570).  The  Cayenne  Caribs  never  go  on  a  big  hunting 
expedition  without  drawing  a  little  blood  from  their  arms  to  prevent 
them  shaking  when  pulling  the  bow:  to  give  them  greater  strength 
for  paddling,  the  young  men  scarified  themselves  on  both  arms. 
Similarly,  before  undertaking  a  journey  on  land  they  never  fail  to 
make  incisions  at  the  level  of  the  calves  (Cr,  280).  Schom- 
burgk  reports  seetag  Indians  bleeding  each  other  as  a  remedy  for 
over  fatigue  (ScF,  235).  There  is  stiU  a  nose-stringing  procedure 
to  be  mentioned:  "In  most  Indian  houses  pieces  of  thick  roughly- 
plated  fiber  or  cord,  as  thick  as  codliae,  and  a  yard  in  length,  are 
seen  hanging  up  in  the  roof.  These  have  all  been  used  once  .  .  . 
that  is,  passed  up  through  the  nose  of  the  owner  of  the  house,  and 
drawn  out  by  the  mouth,  for  the  purpose  of  giving  him  good  luck  in 
hunting"  (Bro,  302).  The  string  tapers  "from  a  very  small  point  at 
one  end  to  a  considerable  thickness  at  the  other  end,  where  the  fibers 
hang  loosely  in  a  bimch  .  .  .  the  thin  end  [is  passed]  up  his  nos- 
tril .  .  .  employed  by  Makusis,  Arecunas,  and  Ackawoi"  (IT,  228). 
The  "exercising"  of  the  limbs  at  each  new  moon  may  perhaps  be 
regarded  in  the  light  of  a  preparatory  ordeal  (Sect.  199). 

328.  In  British  Guiana,  on  the  Kaieteur  savannah,  a  fi-og  is  rubbed 
on  the  transverse  cuts  made  adown  either  side  of  the  hunter's  chest, 
a  diflFerent  frog  being  used  for  different  game.  In  the  same  district 
a  small  live  toad  is  said  to  be  swallowed  for  the  promotion  of  general 
success  in  hunting.^  "Having  scratched  his  wrist  with  the  telson  or 
sting  of  a  scorpion  to  insure  precision  in  darting  the  arrow  from  the 
bow,  and  cut  his  arms  and  legs  with  the  flakes  of  a  broken  bottle,  he 

'  H.  W;  B.  Moore,  in  Daily  Argosy,  Aug.  12, 1910. 


BOTH]  OMENS,   CHABMS,   TALISMANS  279 

rubs  the  back  of  the  kunaua  toad  over  the  woimds;  the  virus  of  the 
reptile  bums  like  fire"  (Da,  253).  In  the  Pomeroon  District,  iu 
addition  to  abstention  from  salt  and  peppers,  cuts  are  made  on  the 
arms,  and  the  spawn  of  the  akura  frog  (Sect.  229)  is  rubbed  not  only 
into  the  incisions,  but  also  into  the  mouth,  nose,  eyes,  and  ears, 
where  it  is  said  to  cause  acute  irritation.  It  is  difficult  to  understand 
the  relationship,  if  any,  between  the  frog  or  toad,  and  success  in  the 
chase  (Sect.  144))  except  on  a  basis  of  some  original  behef  in  the 
divinity  (Sect.  4^)  of  these  batrachians,  as  we  know  to  have  existed 
in  other  parts  of  the  Guianas  (Sect.  349).  The  following  is  an  Arawak 
story: 

229.  The  Wife  Teaches  hek  Husband  to  Hunt  (A) 

There  was  a  man  who  though  he  went  off  regularly  to  the  forest,  never  managed  to 
bring  home  anything,  while  his  brothere-in-law,  who  seldom  went  out,  always  returned 
with  plenty  of  game;  but  they  gave  none  of  it,  either  to  him  or  to  their  sister.  She, 
however,  determined  on  asking  other  people  how  she  could  teach  her  husband  to  be 
as  lucky  as  her  brotheiB,  and  after  a  long  long  time  she  found  out  what  to  do.  She 
then  took  him  one  day  into  the  bush  to  hunt  for  the  akura  frog,  and  when  they  had 
found  the  neat  she  introduced  some  of  the  spawn  into  his  ears,  eyes,  nose,  and  mouth. 
This  burned  him  terribly,  and  made  him  vomit,  so  much  so  that  he  was  obliged  to 
roll  about  in  the  sand  to  ease  the  pain.  After  this,  she  made  him  bathe,  and  then 
brought  him  home.  She  next  asked  her  brothers  to  make  a  small  bow  and  some 
arrows  for  her,  and  with  these  she  sent  her  husband  out  to  bhoot  small  birds  only, 
and  not  to  shoot  more  than  foxir.  While  he  was  away  she  made  j)epper-pot,  using 
very  few  peppers  and  no  salt  whatsoever.  He  returned  with  the  four  little  birds, 
which  she  cooked,  giving  him  two,  and  retaining  two  for  herself.  The  same  procedure 
was  repeated  daily  for  a  week.  The  wife  then  destroyed  the  small  bow  and  arrows, 
and  asked  her  brothers  to  make  bigger  ones,  and  instructed  her  husband  to  shoot 
bigger  birds  with  them;  this  also  continued  for  a  week.  She  next  sent  him  out  with 
this  big  bow  and  arrows  to  hunt  game  of  all  and  any  description,  but  with  a  certain 
proviso:  as  each  animal  or  bird  would  approach  him  in  answer  to  the  "call" 
which  he  would  imitate,  he  was  not  to  shoot,  but  merely  to  point  his  arrow  at 
it ;  only  when  it  was  time  to  return  home  in  the  afternoon  was  he  to  kill  one  anirrml, 
and  fetch  it  to  her.  At  the  begiiming  of  the  fourth  week,  she  sent  him  out  htmting 
again  with  fresh  instructions:  he  was  now  to  shoot  and  kill  everj-thing  that  he  could. 
He  killed  and  brought  home  plenty.  From  that  time  he  and  his  wife  were  never  in 
want  of  food,  and  they  took  care  to  treat  her  brothers  as  they  had  treated  them. 
What  they  could  not  eat,  they  would  barbecue,  and  then  hide.  The  selfish  brothers 
accordingly  wondered  how  their  sister's  husband  now  always  managed  to  kill  more 
game  than  they  did.    They  asked  their  sister,  but  she  refused  to  teU  them. 

230.  In  the  Pomeroon  District  a  hairy  caterpillar  may  be  rubbed 
into  incisions  made  on  the  wrists  and  thighs.  "Hiis  creature,  obtained 
on  the  Rupununi  and  brought  down  here  in  barter,  is  said  to  be 
soaked  in  water  the  whole  of  the  night  previous  to  the  solution  being 
applied,  by  means  of  cotton-wool,  to  the  cuts.  I  have  also  seen  a 
Pomeroon  Arawak  wear  one  on  his  neck.  Im  Thum  (230)  speaks 
of  caterpillars  "the  hairs  of  which  break  off  very  readily,  and  have  a 
great  power   of   irritating  flesh.    These  caterpillars  he  rubs  on  his 


280  ANIMISM  AND  FOLK-LOEE  OP  GUIANA  INDIANS   [bth.ann.SO 

chest  or  thighs,  and  thus  produces  a  considerable  and  very  painful- 
looking  rash."  This  method  employed  by  Makusis,  Arekunas,  aad 
Akawais.  Or  the  hunter  may  mortify,  his  flesh  with  ants,  a  practice 
indulged  in  by  a  member  of  any  of  these  three  tribes  who — 

Takes  a  small  mat,  about  six  or  eight  inches  square,  made  of  narrow  parallel  strips 
of  the  skin  of  a  reed-like  plant  [Ischnodphon]  tied  together  somewhat  as  are  the  laths 
of  a  Venetian  blind.  Between  each  two  of  these  strips  he  inserts  a  row  of  living  ants, 
their  heads  all  one  way.  The  strips  are  exactly  at  such  distance  apart  that  the  ants 
when  once  inserted  can  not  extricate  themselves.  The  huntsman  then  presses  the 
whole  mat,  on  the  side  on  which  are  the  heads  of  the  ants,  against  his  own  chest;  and 
the  ants,  which  are  of  a  large  and  venomous  kind,  bite  most  painfully. "    [IT,  229.] 

331.  WhUe  recovering  from  the  effects  of  his  self-inflicted  cuts  and 
other  injuries,  the  Carib  and  Akawai  nimrod  may  be  waited  upon 
and  nursed  by  some  woman,  but  she  must  be  past  the  climacteric; 
he  is  strictly  forbidden  to  take  liberties  with  any  female.  Though, 
at  first  sight,  the  inconvenience  and  suffering  entailed  by  certain  of 
the  above  procedures  might  seem  to  constitute  a  sort  of  sacrifice  or 
free  gift  for  favors  to  come,  or  at  aU  events  expected,  I  am  afraid  all 
the  evidence  is  in  the  negative.  On  the  other  hand  these  practices 
may  have  a  physiological  basis  of  fact,  and  so  of  reason.  The  passing 
of  the  nose-string  would  certainly  tend  to  clean  the  nasal  mucus 
membrane,  and  so  render  the  olfactory  organ  more  keen;  the  pro- 
hibition of  women  combined  with  an  enforced  diet  would  certainly 
tend  to  make  the  individual  more  fit  and  thus  get  him  into  better 
training;  the  stimulation  of  aU  his  sense  organs  with  the  particular 
frog  slime  may  possibly  hypersensitize  them:  while  the  infliction  of 
physical  pain  within  certain  limits  can  reasonably  be  expected  to 
irritate  the  nervous  system  to  such  an  extent  as  to  render  it  responsive 
to  but  the  slightest  external  stimulus — qualities,  all  of  them,  advan- 
tageous for  the  hunter  to  insure  success  in  the  chase.  It  is  perhaps 
on  somewhat  similar  lines  that,  with  a  view  to  stimulating  the  child 
quickly  to  learn  to  walk,  the  Arawak  mother  wUl  get  a  tibi-tibi 
lizard  and  encourage  it  to  bite  the  infant's  feet  and  knees ;  the  child 
is  also  incited  to  activity  by  putting  a  small  stinging  ant  on  him 
(Da,  250) .  But  it  is  certainly  difficult  to  understand  how  the  artificial 
flattening  of  the  children's  foreheads  by  the  Carib  Island  mothers 
can  be  vindicated  in  the  behef  that  it  helps  the  victims  in  years  to 
come  the  better  to  fly  their  arrows  from  the  tree-tops  by  securing  a 
firm  foot-hold  for  them  (KoP,  552) . 

333.  Hunting  dogs  are  also  made  to  undergo  sixnilar  ordeals,  but 
whether  as  part  and  parcel,  or  independent,  of  their  general  training 
(Sect.  234)  it  is  difficult  to  say.  On  the  Pomeroon  in  addition  to,  or 
in  heu  of,  the  rubbing  of  a  leaf  (Sect.  233)  the  animal's  snout  may 
be  rubbed  with  a  certain  tree-bark  pecuUar  in  that,  when  squeezed 
in  the  hands,  a  sort  of  frothiness  exudes  [?  a  species  of  Inga].    Or 


BOTH]  OMEKS,  CHABMS,  TALISMANS  281 

again,  the  Pomeroon  Indian  will  gash  the  snout  with  a  sting-ray  barb 
and  pour  on  the  raw  surface  a  few  drops  of  a  solution  made  as  follows: 
Some  of  the  hottest  kind  of  peppers  are  squeezed  into  a  swab  of 
cotton  already  moistened  with  a  httle  water;  a  sugar-loaf  funnel  is 
then  made  of  a  suitable  leaf,  the  cotton  swab  expressed  into  it,  and  a 
few  drops  allowed  to  trickle  down  through  the  funnel  on  the  inci- 
sions. It  is  said  that  in  two  or  three  days'  time  the  animal  is  ready  to 
himt,  and  when  on  the  chase  will  keep  his  nose  close  to  the  ground, 
this  action  allowing  of  all  grass  and  undergrowth  being  well  turned 
over  and  scoured.  Ants  are  also  sometimes  made  to  bite  the  crea^- 
ture's  snout;  or  the  same  hairy  caterpillar  previously  mentioned 
(Sect.  £30)  is  rubbed  into  it.  There  is  reported,  however,  an  equally 
painful  method  as  practised  by  the  Makusi,  Arekunas,  and  Akawaios. 

Two  holes  are  dug  in  the  ground,  and  by  pushing  a  stick  from  one  to  the  other  of 
these,  and  then  withdrawing  this,  a  tunnel  or  covered  passage  is  made  between  the 
two  holes.  A  fire  in  which  parings  of  the  hoofs  of  tapirs  and  other  animal  substances 
are  burned,  is  then  kindled  in  one  hole;  ants  and  wasps  are  also  put  into  this  hole, 
and  it  is  then  covered  over  with  sticks  and  earth.  The  smoke  .  .  passes  through 
the  tunnel  into  the  second  hole.  The  poor  dog  is  then  caught,  and  its  head  is  held 
down  in  the  second  hole,  until  the  animal  sometimes  drops  senseless  from  pain. 
[IT,  228.] 

233.  Binas  are  charms,  plant  or  animal,  which  effect  their  purpose 
by  enticing  or  attracting  the  particular  object  or  desire  yearned  for, 
whatever  it  may  be — from  the  capture  of  an  animal  to  the  gratifica^ 
tion  of  a  wish.  The  real  source  of  the  term  Mrv-a  is  from  the  Arawak 
bia-biTia,  meaning  "  to  entice,  attract,"  etc.,  and  so  comes  to  be  appUed 
to  all  those  things,  plant  or  animal,  which  act  on  those  lines.  I  have 
found  nothing  of  this  nature  in  the  inorganic  world,  unless  the  quartz- 
pebbles  within  the  piai's  rattle  are  to  be  considered  such.  As  against 
this  view,  it  might  be  urged  that  the  medioine-man's  tobacco-smoke 
constitutes  the  real  or  at  least  co-equal  attraction  for  the  Spirits 
(Sect.  170).  Im  Thum  is  certainly  incorrect  in  speaking  of  the  word 
being  of  Carib  origin.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  Carib  term  is  turaUdri; 
for  example,  the  Caribs  speak  of  the  bush-hog  biaa  as  ponjo-turallari. 
The  Warrau  word  is  aibihi;  for  instance,  toma-aibihi  means  the  bina 
for  meat,  in  general.  As  a  rule  there  is  but  one  bina  for  each  special 
object  or  thing,  but  not  necessarily.  I  know  of  one  that  is  employed 
for  small  hog,  deer,  and  acouri;  and  with  very  few  exceptions,  the 
plants  employed  as  binas  are  the  different  varieties  of  caladium. 
Indian  huntsmen  place  great  value  on  the  use  of  the  caladia,  each 
variety  being  a  bina  or  charm  to  assist  in  the  taking  of  a  particular 
kind  of  game.  Not  only  do  these  plants  grow  spontaneously  in  old 
fields,  but  the  Indians  carefuUy  remove  and  plant  in  the  immediate 
neighborhood  of  their  dwellings  the  most  valued  kinds,  as  the  binas 
for  tapir,  wild  hogs,  deer,  labbas,  turtle,  and  those  for  the  various 


282  ANIMISM  AND  FOLK-LOBE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS    [eth.  a>'n.  30 

kinds  of  fish  (Da,  253).  As  a  rule,  women  are  supposed  neither  to 
see  nor  to  handle  such  plants  thus  cultivated.  Even  in  so  compara- 
tively civilized  a  district  as  the  Pomeroon  and  Monica,  I  have  cbl- 
lected  more  than  a  score  of  such  plants,  the  respective  leaves  of  which 
in  the  majority  of  cases  bear  some  real  or  fancied  resemblance  to  the 
animal  for  which  they  are  reputed  to  have  so  pecuhar  an  affimty. 
Thus  the  bush-hog  bina  has  a  leaf  easily  recognizable  by  the  small 
secondary  leaf  on  its  under  surface,  representing  the  animal's  scent- 
gland,  though  some  Indians  say  that  it  indicates  the  tip  of  the  nostril; 
the  deer  bina  shows  the  horns,  in  its  general  contour,  and  the  color- 
ation of  the  fur  in  its  venation;  the  armadillo  bina  typifies  the  shape 
of  the  small  projecting  ears;  the  lukunanni  bina  bears  a  variety  of 
colors  resembling  those  around  the  fish's  gills;  the  gillbacker  bina 
develops  the  same  yellowish  color  as  the  fish  which  it  attracts;  the 
labba  bina  has  the  typical  white  markings;  the  powis  bina  bears  the 
identical  shape  of  that  bird's  wing-feather — and  so  on  for  turtle,  huri, 
etc.  Some  of  these  binas  seemingly  must  be  of  comparatively  wide- 
spread use ;  thus,  that  for  the  bush-hog  is  known  in  the  Makusi  country, 
those  for  the  turtle,  and  armadillo,  in  Smiham  (J.  Kodway),  etc. 

The  hunter  puts  the  particular  plant  to  use  by  taking  off  a  yoiuig 
as-yet-unopened  shoot,  and  placing  it,  in  the  rough,  in  his  powder- 
flask,  or  rubbing  it  up  into  the  paint,  with  which  he  smears  his 
face  and  body,  but  especially  all  the  main  joints;  or,  on  the  other 
hand,  he  may  employ  only  the  leaf,  which  he  rubs  on  his  arrow, 
his  fish-hook,  his  gun-barrel,  or  on  his  dog.  In  Cayenne,  these  binas 
{des  Jierbes  enchanteresses)  are  said  to  have  been  hung  up  on  the  trees 
(LAP,  n,  221). 

1834.  In  Cayenne,  the  dog  was  also  rubbed  with  "simples,"  for 
which  procedure  Pitou  gives  the  negative  reason,  "so  that  the  game 
should  not  take  itseK  off  on  its  approach"  (LAP,  ii,  220).  The 
Roucouyennes,  a  Carib  nation  of  the  same  colony,  cultivate  in  their 
clearings  the  Hilnscus  abelmoschus,  from  which  they  make  a  musk- 
scented  infusion  for  washing  their  dogs  before  taking  them  to  hunt 
jaguar  (Cr,  330) :  this,  however,  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  binas,  the 
object  of  its  application  being  to  prevent  the  tiger  biting  the  dog, 
owing  to  the  pungency  of  the  smell.  Hunting  dogs  are  also  rubbed 
over  with  ruku  {Bixa  oreUana)  both  by  Indians  (Trios,  Ojanas,  and 
others)  and  Bush  Negroes  (Go,  3) :  in  British  Guiana  the  practice  is 
said  to  keep  off  certain  ticks  (Ki,  184).  The  methods  adopted 
by  the  CorentjTi  Arawaks  for  "training"  (Sect.  23£)  their  dogs 
to  hunt  may  be  included  here.  While  the  procedure  may  be 
correctly  given,  the  statements  relative  to  the  naming  of  the 
particular  leaf  after  the  animal  which  feeds  on  it  and  the  alleged 
odor  are  of  course  imaginative.  These  Arawaks  fiirst  choose  the 
dogs    for  hunting  various   animals,  according  to  strength,  having 


both] 


OMENS,   CHABMS,   TALISMANS 


283 


each  one  broken  for  hunting  a  diflFerent  species  of  ganae;  taking 
the  largest  for  the  wild  hog,  and  the  smaller  ones  for  the  smaller 
animals.  When  about  six  months  old  they  are  taken  to  the  himt 
with  their  sires,  having  previously  gone  through  the  process  of  being 
washed  and  rubbed  over  with  a  particular  leaf  named  after  the  animal 
which  feeds  on  it,  and  which  the  dog  is  intended  to  hunt;  and  it  is 
curious  that  these  leaves  should  partake  of  the  odor  of  the  animal. 
The  game  being  discovered,  the  young  dog  is  taken  forward,  and  set 
on  him;  but  he  generally  turns  tail  for  the  few  first  times,  as  this 
breed  is  naturally  without  spirit.  He  is  then  taken  up,  and  again 
goes  through  the  same  process  of  washing  and  rubbing  with  the  leaf; 
and  at  length  he  is  treated  to  a  piece  of  the  animal's  flesh,  which 
makes  him  more 
keen  and  ravenous. 
In  this  manner, 
exerting  patience, 
of  which  these  In- 
dians have  a  most 
abundant  stock, 
and  seldom  correct- 
ing the  animal,  it 
becomes  in  time  a 
reliable  and  valu- 
able dog  (StC,  I, 
315).  The  method 
sometimes  used  by 
the  Z&paro  Indians 
of  the  Napo  Eiver 
(upper  Amazon)  in 
training  their  cele- 
brated hunting- 
dogs  consists  in 
putting  a  dose  of  tobacco  down  the  animal's  throat,  his  nose  and 
mouth  being  then  also  stuffed  full  of  it,  until  he  nearly  chokes;  this 
is  to  clear  his  scent  and  sharpen  his  perceptions  (AS,  169). 

335.  01dCaribs,Warraus,  andArawaksof  thePomeroon  and  Monica 
Rivers  agree  in  telling  me  that  they  originally  obtained  their  hunting 
binas — they  are  not  so  sure  about  the  binas  employed  for  other  pur- 
poses— from  certain  very  large  snakes,  which  are  invariably  to  be 
met  with  only  in  localities  so  far  distant  from  the  source  of  informa- 
tion as  to  preclude  the  possibility  of  my  ever  obtaining  specimens. 
The  Caribs  refer  me  to  two  snakes,  the  Orup6ri  (Sect.  S)  and  the 
Aram&ri  (fig.  2).  The  former  lives  on  the  ground,  beyond  the  Waini 
and  the  Barima.  The  latter,  which  is  much  the  bigger,  lives  in  the 
tops  of  trees  and  catches  its  prey  by  pouncing  upon  it  from  above:  it 


FiQ.  2.  Carlb  drinklng-cup,  Pomeroon  River,  bearing  design  showing 
the  two  trees  (o)  in  the  tops  of  which  lives  the  wonderful  Aram£rl 
Snalce  (b),  while  the  roots  (d)  are  surrounded  by  scorpions  (c). 


284  ANIMISM   AND   FOLK-LOBE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS  [bth.  ann.30 

is  also  the  more  dangerous  because  from  it  can  be  obtained  binas 
which,  in  addition  to  attracting  all  kinds  of  game,  can  attract  thunder, 
■lightning,  and  rain.  The  Warraus  admit  that  almost  all  they  know 
about  the  binas  has  been  taught  them  by  the  Akawais  and  Caribs. 
The  Arawak  serpent  is  known  as  Oroli  (Sect.  S6S),  or,  on  accoimt  of 
its  rate  of  progression,  Kolekondro  (the  slow  walker).  The  tradi- 
tions of  all  three  tribes  agree  in  that,  after  having  been  killed,  the 
snake  was  carefully  burnt,  and  that  from  the  ashes  there  subse- 
quently arose  all  the  different  plants,  mostly,  but  not  all  of  them, 
caladiums,  which  are  now  employed  as  binas  (Sect.  168A).  The 
Arawaks  say  that — 

A  long  time  ago  people  noticed  how  every  now  and  again  one  of  their  friends  would 
leave  his  house,  go  into  the  forest,  and  never  be  seen  more.  They  accordingly  made 
up  a  big  party,  and  tracked  the  latest  victim  to  two  immense  silk-cotton  trees,  and 
there  was  the  huge  serpent  stretched  across,  somewhat  like  a  bridge,  from  the  summit 
of  one  tree  to  the  other.  They  found  out  that  from  this  serpentine  bridge,  pieces  of 
the  flesh  would  fall  to  the  ground  where  they  took  on  the  form  of  dry  firewood,  which 
the  innocent  folk  passing  by,  would  gather  up  in  mistake:  that  immediately  upon 
just  touching  this  dead  timber  the  awful  snake  pounced  down  and  seized  its  human 
prey.  It  was  accordingly  agreed  that  Oroli  must  be  killed,  a  deed  which  they  suc- 
ceeded in  effecting  by  means  of  blow-pipes  and  poisoned  arrows.  The  carcass  was 
then  covered  with  bushes  and  saplings,  and  set  fire  to;  as  already  mentioned  the  binas 
all  grew  out  of  the  ashes. 

How  the  special  efficacy  of  each  bina  was  originally  discovered  has 
been  explained  to  me  somewhat  on  the  following  lines :  Trial  would 
daily  be  made  of  one  plant  after  the  other.  Taking,  for  instance, 
Plant  No.  1 :  On  the  first  day,  the  hunter  might  come  across  a  tiger. 
A  plant  that  enticed  or  attracted  such  an  animal  would  certainly  be 
of  no  use  to  him,  and  would  accordingly  be  discarded.  Another  day, 
he  might  try  Plant  No.  2,  and  run  across  a  snake;  that  plant  also 
could  be  cast  aside.  If  on  the  other  hand,  with  Plant  No.  3  he  were 
to  fall  in  with  some  scrub-tm-key  or  similar  game,  he  would  reseirve 
that  plant  for  future  use — and  so  on  with  each  animal  or  bird  of 
economic  value.  But  of  course  nowadays  since  they  know  of  and 
cultivate  these  different  plants  around  their  houses,  such  trials 
are  not  necessary;  they  are  quite  aware  what  particular  plant  will 
specially  attract  some  particular  animal. 

336.  Corresponding  animal  biaas  for  attracting  game  must  be 
somewhat  scarce:  I  have  succeeded  in  obtaining  only  the  following 
examples.  When  Arawaks  on  the  Pomeroon  Idll  a  bush-hog  which 
happens  to  contain  young,  they  bm-y  the  latter  under  the  house  in  a 
spot  below  the  place  where  the  cassava  is  iisually  grated,  the  idea  being 
that  other  bush-hogs  may  come  near  the  house  to  the  spot  whither  the 
young  are  calling  them.  So  among  the  Uaupes  River  Indians,  when 
they  kiU  a  bush-hog  they  bury  the  head  at  the  spot  where  they  first 
met  the  band,  so  that  the  latter  may  not  stray  away  but  return 


BOTH]  OMENS,   CHASMS,   TALISMANS  285 

there  (Cou,  n,  171).  If  a  fisherman  [Pomeroon  Arawaks]  has  been 
unlucky,  and  finally  catches  any  little  fish,  he  will  take  it  off  the 
hook  and,  blowing  into  its  mouth,  say:  "I  will  let  you  go  agaio)  if 
you  tell  your  friends,  the  bigger  fish,  to  come."  Of  course  it  tells 
them,  and  the  fisherman's  luck  is  rewarded.  But  the  Httle  fish  is 
not  given  its  liberty  again  as  promised,  for  the  Indians  say  that  if 
they  returned  it  to  the  water,  it  would  tell  its  friends  not  to  bite  at 
the  hook.  There  are  three  such  fish  that  are  thus  supposed  to  act 
as  binas:  the  w6-shi  {Crenicichla  saxaiiZis),  "sun-fish,"  the  shibaUi 
(^cam),  "patwa,"  and  the  hura-diro  ("i  Eigenmannia  lineatus),  a 
fish  12  to  14  inches  long,  but  of  which  the  long  thin  tail  con- 
stitutes a  good  third.  Similar  ideas  iinderUe  a  procedure  reported 
from  Caracas:  "When  an  Indian  slays  a  wild  beast,  he  opens  its 
mouth,  and  pours  down  its  throat  some  intoxicatiog  hquor,  in  order 
that  its  soul  [Spirit]  may  inform  others  of  a  similar  species  of  the 
kind  reception  it  received,  and  that  they  may  be  encouraged  to 
come  and  share  the  same  favor"  (FD,  52). 

Game,  however,  can  be  attracted  to  the  hunting-dog.  There  is  a 
certain  ant  (kudu-kudu-barilya  of  the  Arawaks)  which,  after  being 
roasted,  is  put  inside  a  piece  of  cassava,  and  given  to  a  dog  to  make 
it  a  good  hunter  of  any  animal;  the  dog  is  simultaneously  trained  to 
go  into  wood-holes  and  earth-holes  by  having  its  food  placed  inside  a 
cassava-squeezer. 

337.  The  next  class  of  binas  deals  with  phases  of  the  sexual  ques- 
tion: conjugal  rights,  mutual  love  and  affection,  and  babies.  Where 
plants  take  the  title  rdles,  these  are  again  mostly  caladia.  Arawak, 
Warrau,  Akawai,  and  Carib  women  all  have  their  own  binas  for 
managing  the  opposite  sex.  The  Arawak  yoimg  woman  plants  her 
hiaro  (girl)-bina  usually  in  some  secluded  spot  known  only  to  herself; 
she  will  bathe  with  a  leaf  of  it,  or  carry  it  about  with  her,  and,  pro- 
vided the  opportimity  offers,  without  her  being  seen,  may  rub  it 
over  her  lover's  hammock,  or  she  may  rub  her  own  hands  with  it, 
and  then  touch  his.  In  any  case,  the  man  must  be  ignorant  of  what 
is  going  on,  and,  provided  the  procedure  is  strictly  carried  out  as 
described,  he  wiU  never  have  any  desire  to  transfer  his  affections 
elsewhere.  Again,  the  same  woman  may  employ  another  plant,  not 
a  caladium,  called  the  kurua-bina,  apparently  a  Rajania  of  the  Yam 
family;  she  will  similarly  bathe  with  the  leaf,  but  retaining  the 
water  in  which  she  has  thus  made  her  ablutions,  will  strew  it  on  the 
path  along  which  her  sweetheart  is  about  to  travel,  telling  it  to  make 
him  return  soon.  The  male  Arawak  has  a  corresponding  behef  as  to 
the  wajili  (man)-biaa,  the  leaf  of  which  he  generally  carries  about 
with  the  object  of  brushiog  over  his  girl's  face  or  shoulders:  he  is 
very  intent  on  going  through  this  performance  when  he  notices  that 
she  has  a  weakness  for  other  men.     Other  peoples  (as  the  Caribs)  have 


286  ANIMISM   AND   FOLK-LOBE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS   [kth.  ANN.  30 

similar  practices.  I  know  of  three  plants  that  are  used  by  these 
people  on  the  Pomeroon.  Wai-iru:  squeeze  and  pinch  up  a  leaf  or 
tw»  in  water,  rub  one's  self  now  with  the  leaf,  and  throw  the  water 
just  used  in  the  direction  of  the  person  desired,  at  the  same  time 
calling  his  (or  her)  name.  Wamba:  used  by  the  father  for  an  absent 
elder  son,  or  by  the  mother  for  an  absent  elder  daughter;  take  a 
leaf  with  you  ta  your  hammock  and  call  the  boy's  or  girl's  name. 
Akami:  when  a  person  has  come  with  the  object  of  picking  a  quarrel, 
rub  the  leaf  over  one's  head  and  face:  it  will  make  him  qmte  ami- 
cable and  friendly.  So  also  among  the  Surinam  Kalinas  (Caribs) 
de  Goeje  tells  us  that  to  evoke  affection,  one  rubs  the  hands  and 
face  with  turalla  (Go,  14, 15) :  a  woman,  for  instance,  can  do  this  when 
her  man  is  away  traveliag,  so  that  he  may  not  forget  her.  When  an 
Arawak  or  Warrau  woman  is  desirous  of  having  a  baby,  and  none 
happens  to  appear  in  the  natural  course  of  things,  she  pounds  up  in 
water  a  certain  fungus,  and  drinks  the  infusion.  As  I  have  shown 
elsewhere,  the  absence  of  a  boy  is  a  slur  on  the  Indian's  womanhood 
and  entails  many  opprobrious  epithets.  The  fungus  in  question, 
a  species  of  Nidularia,  is  known  to  the  Arawak  as  Kassato-lokono- 
biabiaa  (lit.,  "baby-plenty  charm"),  or,  in  its  shortened  form,  as 
Kassa-lo-bina.  These  women  here  never  eat  of  a  "  double-fruit "  which 
would  mean  twins  for  them  (Sect.  284^) . 

337 A.  The  following  is  one  of  the  few  legends  met  Andth  that  con- 
tains reference  to  the  application  of  Binsis: 

The  Blnta,  the   Resukeected  Father,  and   the  Bad  Girl  (W) 

There  was  once  a  man  with  wife,  two  children,  and  his  brother  staying  together  in 
the  one  house.  They  were  all  Warraus.  Going  one  morning  to  their  field,  husband 
and  wife  left  the  brother-in-law  with  instructions  to  go  fishing  so  there  might  be  some- 
thing to  eat  on  their  return;  but  when  they  came  back,  they  found  he  had  been  lazy, 
had  never  even  been  outside  the  house,  and  had  eaten  even  the  little  that  was  in  it. 
This  made  the  man  angry,  and  he  upbraided  his  brother-in-law  thus:  "  I  have  to  go 
and  cut  the  field.  I  have  to  go  into  the  bush  to  get  game,  and  down  to  the  water  to 
catch  fish.  I  have  all  the  work  to  do,  while  you  do  nothing  but  lie  idle  in  your  ham- 
mock all  day.  Although  I  am  now  tired,  I  must  go  and  catch  fish."  Saying  this, 
he  took  his  harpoon  '  and  went  down  to  the  creek.  The  brother-in-law  thereupon 
took  up  his  cutlass,  and  after  sharpening  it  followed  him  and  got  into  his  corial.  They 
met  just  as  the  husband  was  returning  with  his  boat,  bringing  a  large  fish  that  he  had 
speared  with  his  lance.  "Hallo!  finished  already?"  said  the  one.  "Yes,"  replied 
the  other,  "  I  caught  a  fine  fish,  and  have  it  here."  "Well,  lend  me  your  lance,"  said 
the  brother-in-law,  "and  I  will  go  and  shoot  a  fine  fish  also."  The  two  corials  thus 
drew  near,  and  raising  his  lance,  the  man  put  it  into  his  brother-in-law's  boat.  Just  as 
he  did  so,  the  latter  struck  him  with  the  cutlass  and  he  fell  dead  after  giving  his  assail- 
ant two  cuts.  The  brother-in-law  then  tried  to  get  rid  of  the  corpse  by  throwing  it  into 
the  water.  Now  it  seems  that  when  the  sister  saw  her  brother,  after  sharpening  his 
cutlass,  leave  the  house  in  a  passion,  she  knew  that  some  evil  was  about  to  happen,  and 
said  to  the  children:  "  Your  uncle  is  vexed:  he  has  sharpened  his  cutlass  and  followed 

'  1  Fish-lance  with  detachable  head. 


BOTH]  OMENS,   CHABMS,   TALISMANS  287 

your  father.  Let  lis  see  what  he  intends  doing."  So  with  her  children  she  followed 
the  two  men,  and  came  upon  them  just  as  her  brother  was  trying  to  throw  over  the 
body.  "No!  don't  do  that,  brother,"  she  said:  "Since  you  have  killed  him,  you 
must  take  the  body  back  to  his  house  and  bury  it  there."  He  did  what  he  was  told: 
took  the  body  home,  and  started  felling  a  tree  in  which  to  bury  it.  In  the  meantime 
the  woman  sent  her  children  to  fetch  the  deceased's  brother  and  his  old  mother,  at  the 
same  time  sending  them  a  mess^:e  that  they  must  not  be  vexed.  The  mother  and 
brother  came,  and  as  they  drew  near  they  saw  the  murderer  finish  scooping  out  the 
trunk  and  take  it  to  the  house,  where  he  commenced  digging  the  grave.  The  brother 
was  vexed,  but  his  mother  said:  "  Don't  trouble  the  man:  we  will  see  first  of  all  what 
the  widow  intends  to  do.  The  latter,  holding  a  cutlass  in  her  hand,  waa  watching 
the  murderer  dig;  she  told  him  to  hurry  and  finish  his  task  quickly.  When  the 
grave  was  finished,  he  put  the  coffin  in,  and  then  the  corpse,  which  was  properly  dressed 
with  paint  and  ornaments,  and  with  which  were  placed  knife,  fish-hooks,  and  other 
things.'  As  he  was  filling  up  the  grave  with  earth,  his  hands  all  bleeding  from  the 
wounds  the  deceased  had  given  him,  his  sister  struck  him  from  behind  on  his  neck 
with  her  cutlass.  After  standing  awhUe,  he  dropped  dead  and  a  new  grave  waa  dug 
for  him ,  alongside  oi  the  other.  They  put  him  into  this  bare  as  he  was,  without  dress  or 
ornaments,  or  any  of  his  belongings;  this  was  because  they  had  no  pity  or  sorrow  for 
him.  The  mother  and  broth pr  of  the  dead  man  returned  to  the  old  woman 's  home  that 
very  same  day.  They  prevailed  on  the  widow  much  against  her  will  to  come  with 
them  and  bring  the  children.  When  they  reached  home  the  brother  took  charge  of 
the  widow,  placed  her  in  his  hammock,  and  tiuning  to  his  first  wife  said,  "I  am  going 
to  take  this  wonum:  she  can  make  children:  you  cannot  make  them."  But  the  two 
children  that  she  had  already  did  not  like  staying  in  their  new  home,  and  regularly 
every  morning,  after  they  had  had  something  to  eat,  they  would  hurry  ofi  to  their 
father's  grave  and  would  not  return  until  late.  On  the  third  day  of  their  visit  to  the 
grave  they  met  a  Hebu,  but  the  children  did  not  recognize  him .  He  said  to  them :  "If 
you  want  yoiu:  father  you  must  pick  a  leaf  of  a  certain  tree  [which  he  mentioned]  and 
rub  it  over  the  grave,  when  he  will  appear  to  you."  But  we  don't  know  the  leaf,"they 
replied:  so  the  little  man  gathered  some  of  the  leaves  for  them.  He  told  them  to 
rub  the  leaves  over  the  ground  where  the  body  was  buried,  directly  they  reached 
there  on  the  following  morning,  and  then  to  come  again  at  mid-day,  when  their  father 
would  be  present.  They  did  exactly  as  they  had  been  told  next  morning,  and  when 
they  returned  at  mid-day  they  saw  their  father  seated  on  a  bench.  They  approached. 
He  said,  "Fetch  me  water  to  drink."  After  he  had  drunk,  he  said,  "Where  is  your 
mother?"  and  when  he  learned  that  she  was  at  their  grandmother's  he  told  them  to 
go  and  fetch  her.  Now  as  soon  as  they  reached  their  mother  and  told  her  all  these 
things,  she  exclaimed,  '  'How  can  this  be?  How  can  your  father  send  for  me  when 
he  is  dead?' '  Thus  it  was,  she  would  not  believe  all  this  at  first,  but  when  the  boys 
pleaded, '  'Come,  Mother!  It  is  all  true! ' '  she  went.  The  boys  wished  her  to  bring 
her  hammock  along,  but  she  refused.  '  'What  is  the  use  of  it?' '  she  said;  for  she  did 
not  believe  as  yet  what  they  told  her.  However,  she  did  go,  and  sure  enough  when 
she  reached  the  place,  she  recognized  the  very  man,  her  husband,  seated  there  on  the 
bench  right  in  front  of  her.  The  first  thing  he  asked  her  was, '  'Where  is  your  brother? ' ' 
to  which  she  replied,  "AMij!  I  killed  him,  and  buried  him  beside  you."  "Well," 
came  the  husband's  answer,  "you  will  never  see  him  again."  Now  although  her 
husband  was  verj'  weak  with  all  that  he  had  suffered  and  passed  through,  she  nursed 
him  carefully  and  brought  him  buck  to  health,  so  that  within  a  weak  he  was  quite 
himself  again. 

'  It  is  usual  among  the  Warraus,  some  six  days  or  so  after  a  death,  to  prepare  a  small  quantity  of  drink, 
to  cut  the  wife's  hair,  and  make  a  bundle  of  the  deceased's  remaining  belongings,  which  are  then  buried 
separately. 


288  ANIMISM   AND   FOLK-LOEE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS   [bth.  ANN.  30 

238.  There  are  certain  animal  biaas  corresponding  in  their  action 
with  the  plant  binas  just  mentioned  in  connection  with  sexual  mat- 
ters. Among  the  Pomeroon  Arawaks,  when  the  husband  is  very 
jealous  and  ill-tempered,  his  wife  will  cut  off  the  head  of  a  small 
Uzard  (yamorro),  bum  it,  and  put  the  ashes  into  the  water  which 
she  gives  him  to  drink;  any  man  or  woman  can  then  make  the  hus- 
band do  whatever  he  or  she  hkes.  When  one  woman  wants  another's 
husband  she  will  manage  to  put  marabunta  (wasp)  eggs  into  his 
drink,  which  will  make  him  leave  his  own  wife  and  go  off  with  her 
(the  eggs  are  pounded  up  and  roasted  before  mixing) .  On  the  upper- 
Amazons,  the  native  women,  even  the  white  and  half-caste  inhabitants 
of  the  towns,  attach  superstitious  value  to  the  skin  and  feathers 
of  the  papfi.-uira,  believing  that  the  relics  will  have  the  effect  of 
attracting  for  the  happy  possessors  a  train  of  lovers  and  followers. 
[The  Indians  have  noticed  these  miscellaneous  hunting  parties  of 
birds,  but  appeared  not  to  have  observed  that  they  are  occupied  in 
searching  for  insects.  They  have  suppUed  their  want  of  knowledge 
...  by  a  theory  which  has  degenerated  into  a  myth  to  the  effect 
that  the  onward  moving  bands  are  led  by  a  little  gray  bird  called 
the  papd-uird,  which  fascinates  all  the  rest  and  leads  them  a  weaiy 
dance  through  the  thickets.  There  is  certainly  some  "appearance  of 
truth  in  this  explanation;  for  sometimes  stray  birds  encountered  in 
the  line  of  march  are  seen  to  be  drawn  into  the  throng,  and  purely 
frugiverous  birds  are  now  and  then  foimd  mixed  up  with  the  rest, 
as  though  led  away  by  some  will-of-the-wisp  (HWJtJ,  346).]  When 
it  is  known  to  her  intimate  friends  and  relatives  that  an  Arawak 
woman  wants  an  infant,  they  will  give  her  to  drink  of  a  mixtiu^,  in 
which,  unknown  to  her,  they  have  placed  the  roasted  and  pulverized 
remains  of  either  a  cockroach  (matero) ,  the  eggs  of  a  certain  spider, 
or  the  paw  of  an  opossum  (yawarri) . 

239.  TaJismans,  the  last  group  of  charms  to  be  dealt  with,  include 
those  which  repel  evil,  bad  luck,  and  the  like,  and  so  have  a  protective 
or  defensive  character — those  which  endow  the  Indian  with  such 
superior  advantages  of  body  and  estate  as  enable  him  to  get  the 
better  of  his  feUow-creatures,  human  and  animal.  Matters  of  cour- 
age, health  and  strength,  power  to  withstand  sickness  and  his  ene- 
mies, craft  to  excel  in  the  chase,  trade  and  barter,  all  find  a  place 
here.  With  regard  to  the  chase,  the  provisions  mentioned  in  Sect 
24B  might  very  reasonably  be  regarded  as  talismanic.  Among  the 
Trios  (Caribs)  of  Surinam,  says  de  Goeje — 

We  saw  afresh  how  one  of  our  party  rubbed  the  palms  of  his  hands  with  tiiraUa 
[caladium  bulb]  on  arrival  at  a  \dllage  of  which  they  had  much  dread.  A  young  man 
on  the  journey  through  the  forest  carried  siinti  [turalla]  in  a  little  palm-leaf  box 
attached  to  the  neck,  in  order  to  strengthen  his  head  and  shoulders.  A  child  with 
fever  was  one  afternoon  washed  by  its  mother  with  water  into  which  finely  ground 
siinti  had  been  placed.  As  after  two  days,  the  fever  again  appeared,  it  was  streaked 
with  ruku  paint,  with  which  the  same  stuff  had  been  mixed.    [Go,  I't-lS.] 


SOTH] 


OMENS,   CHABMS,   TALISMANS 


289 


De  Goeje  states  also  that  when  making  a  purchase,  the  buyer  will 
take  a  Uttle  turalla  between  his  lips  to  prevent  the  seller  overteaching 
him.  According  to  Schomburgk  (ScF,  215), the  Msdongkongs  used  for 
necklaces  a  bunch  of  the  slender  stems  of  a  cryptogamous  plant,  a  fern 
called  Zinapipo  by  them,  to  which  they  ascribed  talismanic  property. 

240.  On  the  Pomeroon  one  can  string  the  tail-rings  and  claws  of  a 
scorpion,  and  tie  it  round  his  Uttle  girl's  wrist.  By  and  by,  when  she 
becomes  a  woman  and  makes  paiwarri,  the  liquor  will  be  "strong 
and  biting."^  Tiger  teeth,  threaded  and  tied  on  the  child,  wiU  also 
insure  its  gaining  strength  [Arawaks];  bush-hog  teeth  will  make  a 
good  huntsman  of  him  [Atorais  and  Wapisianas]  (Cou,  n,  315);  tiger 
teeth  or  bush-hog  teeth  wiU 
preserve  him,  when  he  grows 
up,  from  being  attacked  by  wild 
beasts  [Uaupes  River]  (Cou,  n, 
171).  Makusi  women  and  chil- 
dren wear  round  their  necks 
tigers'  teeth,  to  which  they  as- 
cribe talismanic  power  (ScT,  6 1 ; 
ScR,  n,  83).  On  the  Berbice 
the  sticks  cut  down  by  the  saw- 
yer beetle  are  given  by  the  In- 
dians to  children  cutting  teeth, 
to  rub  their  gimis  with,  under 
the  impression  that  as  a  result 
the  teeth  will  grow  strong  and 
sharp  (Da,  15).  With  the  In- 
dians of  the  upper  Napo  River 
(Amazons)  bracelets  and  arm- 
lets of  iguana  skin  are  much 
affected,  as  in  some  parts  of 
Central  America,  with  the  same 
association  of  their  imparting  bravery  and  pugnacity  to  the  wearer 
(AS,  154).  To  obtain  sharp  vision,  a  Kobeua  Indian  will  rub  his  eyes 
with  those  of  a  certain  falcon  (KG,  n,  153).  The  Caribs  and  almost 
all  other  Indians  ascribe  talismanic  powers  to  the  lai^e  teeth  of  an 
alligator  (ScA,  336).  West  of  the  Orinoco  alligator  teeth  are  em- 
ployed by  the  Indians  as  an  ornament  for  the  neck  and  arms;  they 
are  also  regarded  as  an  antidote  for  certain  poisons,  and  as  an 
alexipharmic  in  general  (FD,  151).  As  an  antidote  for  poison, 
within  the  Orinoco  area,  Gumilla  speaks  of  alligator  teeth  mounted 
in  gold  or  silver  and  tied  by  a  small  chain  on  one  of  the  arms  or 

>  This  comparison  between  scorpions  and  strong  liquor  is  very  cliaracteristic  with  the  Pomeroon  Caribs. 
A  typical  decoration  on  their  drilling  vessels  is  the  pot-hook  (i.  e.  the  scorpion,  fig.  3).  See  also  around 
the  central  ring  in  fig.  2. 

15961° — 30BTH— 15 19 


Fio.  3.  Carib  goblet,  Pomeroon  River,  decorated 
with  pot-book  (scorpion)  pattern. 


290  ANIMISM  AND  FOLK-LOBE  OF  GUIANA  INDIANS   [bth.  ann.  30 

made  up  into  rings  worn  on  the  fingers;  but  this  would  appear  to  be 
a  discovery  learned  from  the  negro  slaves  (G,  n,  225) . 

^OA.  The  apphcation  of  red  paint  was  sometimes  considered  a 
talisman  against  sickness  and  disease.  Thus,  among  the  Makusis  of 
the  Rupimini  the  mothers  ceremonially  rub  red  (aromatic)  paint  on 
the  heads  of  their  children,  who  are  then  supposed  to  be  protected 
from  illness  and  the  power  of  Evil  Spirits  (ScR,  i,  366).  The  men 
[Guahibos  of  the  Vichada  River,  Orinoco]  then  squatted  on  the  little 
benches,  and  the  women  painted  them  from  top  to  toe  with  a  red  paste; 
this,  the  women  said,  would  protect  them  from  sicknesses  (Cr,  548). 
On  the  branches  of  the  upper  Rio  Negro  also  red  paint  was  considered 
a  prophylactic  against  disease  (KG,  i,  158;  ii,  85,  150).  The  applica- 
tion of  blood  would  almost  seem  to  have  had  an  antecedent  origin, 
from  which  that  of  the  red  paint  was  but  a  development,  and  yet, 
strange  to  say,  the  positive  evidence  now  available  points  rather  to 
the  reputed  ciu-ative  than  the  protective  power  of  the  vital  fluid.  Thus 
in  some  cases  the  father,  when  the  child  is  weakly,  has  his  own  flesh 
cut  in  close  parallel  lines:  the  blood  flowuig  from  the  wounds  is 
mixed  with  water  for  washing  and  strengthening  the  child  (Da,  250). 
Among  the  Island  Caribs,  after  the  couvade  the  child's  face  is 
smeared  with  the  father's  blood  to  impart  courage  (RP,  550).  On 
the  Orinoco,  when  the  Guama  women  recognize  that  any  of  their 
children — nurshngs  or  somewhat  older  ones — are  sick,  they  transflx 
theicown  tongues  with  flnely-ground  bone  lancets;  the  blood  gushes 
forth  in  torrents  and  with  it  they  bespatter  their  yoimgsters  by 
mouthfuls,  while,  with  their  hands,  they  smear  it  aU  over  them  from 
head  to  foot  (G,  i,  164).  In  the  same  area,  for  older  people  it  is  one  of 
the  duties  of  the  captains  of  the  Guama  nation  to  slash  his  flesh  daily 
and  drain  off  his  blood  in  order  to  besmear  the  breasts  of  all  those 
under  his  command  who  are  sick  (G,  i,  164).  Dance  (250)  speaks 
of  an  old  man  being  washed  in  turtle's  blood. 

241.  The  widespread  belief  in  Spirits  connected  with  mountains, 
rocks,  stones,  etc.,  will  probably  help  to  explain  the  talismanic  virtues 
ascribed  to  the  green  Amazon-stones  (Lapis  nephriticus) ,  the  piedra 
hijada  of  the  Spaniards.  Out  on  the  islands  "  they  also  wear  necklaces 
made  out  of  large  crystals  and  green  stones  which  come  from  the 
mainland  toward  the  Amazon  River,  and  have  a  healing  virtue;  it 
is  their  precious  ornament  and  is  only  worn  at  feasts"  (BBR,  248). 
Hmnboldt  found  them  among  the  Indians  of  the  Rio  Negro,  where 
they  are  carried  on  the  neck  as  amulets  for  protection  agaiast  fever, 
and  the  bites  of  poisonous  snakes  (AVH,  ii,  395,  462) ;  Martius  found 
them  on  the  Rio  Negro  among  the  inhabitants  of  Sylves,  and  Schom- 
burgk  in  Demerara.     The  last-named  authority  says: 

Through,  the  Caribs  along  the  Guiana  coast  these  stones  were  brought  into  Demerara 
where  they  are  known  as  Macvuiba  or  Calkot  stones.    On  the  Orinoco  they  are  called 


BOTH]  OMENS,   CHABMS,   TALISMANS  291 

Macagua.  They  were  formerly  brought  in  considerable  quantities  by  the  Caribs  to 
Demetara,  but  now  very  rarely  ...  As  I  was  told  by  people,  these  stones  were  also 
formerly  brought  to  Demerara  in  the  form  of  fishes  and  other  animals,  as  well  as  with 
figures  cut  into  the  surfaces.  .  .  .  According  to  Barrere,  they  were  treasured  more  than 
gold  by  the  Caribs:  such  a  stone  was  the  price  of  a  slave.  Raleigh  saw  them  on  the 
Ordnoko,  and  noticed  that  every  Cacique  had  such  a  stone  which  was  usually  carried 
by  his  women:  they  treasured  them  more  than  gold.  Lawrence  Keymis  says  of  the 
Carib  and  other  tribes  who  dwell  on  the  Aiawari,  below  the  Oyapoke:  "Their  money 
is  white  and  green  stones."  He  found  the  same  thing  on  the  Corent^-n  .  .  .  According 
to  Clavigero  they  are  identical  with  the  green  stones  of  the  Mexican  Anahuacs:  these 
people  could  cut  all  manners  of  figures  out  of  this  stone,  and  knew  also  how  to  cut 
diamonds.    [ScR,  n,  330-2.] 

These  Amazon  stones,  as  just  mentioned,  were  highly  valued  by 
the  GaJibis  of  Cayenne,  who  called  them  takourave,  about  which  Pierre 
Barrere  has  left  us  this  account : 

This  stone  is  of  olive  color,  of  a  slightly  paler  green,  and  close  to  a  pearl  gray  {presque 
d^un  gris  de  perles).  I  have  brought  all  colors  from  Guiana.  The  most  common 
shape  one  gives  to  this  stone  is  cylindrical,  length  of  2,  3,  up  to  4  inches,  by  six  or 
seven  lines  in  diameter,  and  drilled  their  whole  length.  I  have  seen  some  of  them 
that  were  squared,  oval,  to  which  one  had  given  the  shape  of  a  crescent  and  imprinted 
upon  it  the  figure  of  a  toad,  or  some  other  animals.  This  stone  is  known  by  lapidaries 
under  the  name  of  jade.  It  is  highly  polished,  and  so  hard,  that  one  can  hardly  work 
with  it  except  with  diamond  powder.  One  has  assured  me  that  it  is  artificial:  that 
a  nation  called  Tapouye  who  live  150  leagues,  or  thereabout  from  Para,  busy  themselves 
in  making  them.     [PBa,  175.] 

There  is  another  interesting  reference  to  these  green  and  gray  jade 
stones  in  Surinam.  They  are  stones  harder  than  jasper,  susceptible 
of  a  fine  polish  and  making  fire  with  a  steel,  although  oily  to  the  sight 
and  touch;  they  are  extremely  hard  to  work.  The  Indians  also  set 
such  great  store  on  them  that  they  regard  these  stones  as  very  precious 
jewels,  with  which  they  decorate  themselves  when  disposed  to  show 
themselves  with  all  their  fine  attire  (Fe,  ii,  351).  I  have  come  across 
a  possible  reference  to  them  in  a  Warrau  legend  (Sect.  139).  A  com- 
parison between  these  Amazon  stones  and  the  drilled  stones  of  quartz 
imperfectly  crystalized,  used  as  neck  ornaments  and  as  symbols  of 
authority  by  the  chiefs  among  theUaupes  River  Indians  (ARW,  191), 
is  well  worth  consideration. 


Chaptee  XV 

EESTRICTIONS    ON    GAME    AJSTD    FOOD,    VISION,    ARTS 
AND  CRAFTS,  NOMENCLATURE  (TABOOS) 

Restrictions  on  Game  and  Food:  Must  not  hunt  too  many  of  one  land  (S42);  spirit 
of  slain  animal  must  be  prevented  injuring  slayer  (f-^);  hunter  must  not  himself 
bring  his  "bag"  into  the  house  (S44);  when  animal  is  killed  by  arrow  or  gun-trap, 
meat  has  to  be  cooked  in  special  manner  (243);  food  not  eaten  after  nightfall  (S46); 
Food  restrictions  on  age,  sex,  and  nation  (2-^7):  at  moon-eclipse,  puberty,  pr^nancy, 
and  other  periods,  in  mourning,  sickness,  traveling  (J148);  of  totem-animals  (1S4S); 
Attributes  of  animals  eaten  may  be  transferred  by  ingestion  to  the  consumer  (250). 
Dogs  also  restricted  as  to  food  (251). 

Restrictions  on  Vision:  Protective  or  defensive  measure  to  prevent  Spirit  being 
attracted  toward  visitor  (252);  same  principle  applied  to  taking  of  a  photograph,  etc. 
(25S);  practice  may  be  accompanied  with  flagellation  (254);  a  sign  of  envy,  hatred, 
and  malice  (255);  concurrent  expression  of  a  wish  (256);  at  place  of  entertainment 
(257). 

Restrictions  on  Arts  and  Crafts:  Manufacture  of  pottery  (258-259);  hammocks, 
canoes,  huts,  and  field-work  (260);  the  uses  of  the  fan,  and  dress  (261);  preparation 
of  curare  (wurali)  poison  (262). 

Restrictions  in  Nomenclature — Personal  Names:  Association  between  individual 
and  name,  which  must  not  be  mentioned  in  his  presence  (26S);  naming  of  child  (164); 
change  of  name  (265).  Reasons  for  giving  certain  names  to  dogs  (266).  Special 
words  have  to  suit  special  circumstances  (266 A). 

!842.  If  Indians  hunt  too  many  of  one  kind  of  game,  the  Bush  Spirit 
of  that  particular  animal  may  come  and  do  them  harm  (Sect.  98). 

The  Baboon  Cough  (W) 

There  was  a  party  of  Indians  hunting  baboons.  They  would  take  their  hammocks 
out  into  the  forest,  kill  a  baboon,  dry  it,  smoke  it,  catch  another,  rest  themselves 
there,  and  start  a  similar  procedure  on  the  morrow.  They  made  a  continuous  business 
of  baboon-hunting,  and  did  nothing  else.  One  day  they  went  away  as  usual,  leaving 
but  one  woman  behind.  After  a  time  she  heard  a  roaring  in  the  distance,  just  like 
thunder,  and  waiting  a  while  she  heard  a  whistling,  just  like  that  of  a  man  when  he 
is  tired. ^  It  was  indeed  some  one  coming  along,  and  at  last  she  saw  an  old  man  with 
bent  back  supporting  himself  with  a  stick.  He  approached  the  woman  and  said,  "How 
do  you  do,  grandchild! "  Now,  as  she  was  quite  an  old  woman  you  can  imagine  how 
old  he  must  have  been.  He  was  really  the  Hebu  grandfather  of  all  the  baboons.  She 
got  up,  fetched  a  stool,  bade  him  be  seated,  and  offered  him  dried  meat  and  cassava. 
The  old  man  had  a  good  look  at  the  dried  meat  and  started  crying:  "Oh,  my  poor 
grandchildren!  So  that  is  how  I  am  losing  every  one  of  you. "  He  told  the  woman 
to  take  the  food  away,  that  he  wanted  none  of  it,  and  he  then  asked  her  where  all  the 
rest  of  the  people  were  gone.  She  told  him  that  they  were  all  out  hunting  the  very 
same  game  that  he  had  refused.  "Very  well, "  said  he,  "let  them  all  remain  at  home 
tomorrow,  and  I  will  meet  them. "    He  then  went  away.    At  evening  time,  the  hunt- 


1  When  a  Warrau  is  very  very  tired  he  gives  a  whistle, something  like  ho-ho'-wil  Ao-Ao'-wi.'  tocatohhis 
breath.    The  Indians  say  the  old  people  do  it  still. 

292 


BOTH]  BESTEICTIONS  293 

ing  party  returned,  and  the  old  woman  told  her  husband  what  had  happened,  and  all 
about  the  queer  old  man,  but  he  would  not  believe  her,  saying  that  she  must  have  been 
visited  by  some  old  sweetheart.  So  she  went  and  told  the  rest  of  the  people,  and  when 
the  head-man  had  listened  to  her  story,  he  said,  "Yes,  what  she  says  must  be  true. 
We  will  remain  with  her  tomorrow. "  They  therefore  stayed  with  her  next  day.  At 
the  appointed  time  they  heard  the  roaring  foUowed  by  a  whistle.  Now  when  the 
old  woman,  who  was  still  angry  with  her  husband  for  not  having  believed  her,  heard 
the  whistle,  she  said  mockiM;ly,  "There  you  are!  That's  my  sweetheart! "  and  a  few 
minutes  later  the  old  man  put  in  an  appearance.  He  was  given  a  seat,  and  having 
learned  that  everybody  was  at  home,  he  told  them  all  to  stand  up  in  a  line,  side  by 
side.  One  woman,  who  was  in  advanced  pregnancy,  was  half  ashamed  to  take  so 
prominent  a  position,  and  recognizing  that  the  queer  old  man's  hand  was  big  and 
sharp  like  a  claw,  she  became  frightened;  she  felt  sure  she  must  be  dealing  with  a 
Hebu  of  some  sort,  and  made  her  escape.  Having  thus  got  all  the  people  into  line,  the 
Hebu  quickly  passed  down  the  ranks,  and  "clawing"  in  the  air,  so  to  speak,  at  each 
person's  head,  killed  every  one  of  them.  This  done,  he  called  out  twice  for  his  wife 
to  come,  and  she  answered  him;  she  was  a  very  old  granny  carrying  an  immense 
quake,  so  big  that  she  could  cram  four  or  five  people  into  it.  And  this  is  just  what 
the  old  woman  did;  she  carried  the  dead  bodies,  quakeful  by  quakeful,  over  to  her  own 
place.  In  the  meantime,  the  old  man  Hebu  examined  the  roof  and  under  the  flooring; 
he  even  opened  the  troolie  covering  of  the  banab  to  see  if  anyone  was  in  hiding.  But 
both  he  and  his  wife  were  being  watched  by  the  pregnant  woman,  who  had  made  her 
escape;  she  saw  everything,  and  then  reported  to  her  friends  at  the  next  settlement. 
The  head-man  and  the  others  accompanied  her  to  the  spot  where  the  Hebu's  wife 
had  carried  all  the  dead  bodies.  They  came  to  an  immense  silk-cotton  tree,  so  huge 
that  the  cavities  of  its  entire  trunk  and  branches  were  occupied  by  members  of  the 
baboon-Hebu  family.  The  party  made  a  large  fire  around  the  tree,  and  threw  peppers 
into  it;'  this  smoked  out  and  killed  all  the  Hebu  baboons,  from  the  youngest  to  the 
oldest,  the  queer  old  grandfather  Hebu  being  killed  last  [Sect.  167].  Of  course  before 
giving  up  the  ghost  they  did  a  lot  of  choking  and  coughing,  and  in  his  dying  rage  the 
old  Hebu  swore  that  this  choking  and  coughing  would  remain  with  us  forever. 
Indeed,  it  is  this  pepper  sickness  which  is  causing  so  much  mischief  now  and  killing 
so  many  of  our  children.  We  Warrau  Indians  have  known  the  sickness  for  a  long  time 
as  the  ' '  baboon  cough, "  but  you  white  people  are  ignorant  of  this,  and  persist  in  calling 
it  whooping-cough. 

343.  Special  precautions  have  to  be  taken  when  any  large  animal 
has  been  slain,  to  protect  the  hunter  from  any  harm  that  might  be 
expected  from  the  Spirit  of  the  animal  he  has  just  destroyed  (Sect. 
129).  Thus,  when  a  big  snake  or  other  lai^e  animal  is  killed,  arrows 
are  stuck  into  the  ground  in  the  middle  of  the  pathway  leading  from 
the  place  of  destruction  toward  the  house,  with  a  view  to  preventing 
the  Spirit  of  the  beast  coming  to  do  the  slayer  or  his  family  any 
hurt.  The  pecuhar  arrangement  of  the  pointed  sticks  which  Bar- 
rington  Brown  described  from  the  Emoy  River  between  Enaco  and 
Taiepong  villages  toward  the  upper  Potaro,  probably  served  a 
similar  purpose:  "In  many  places  on  the  path  we  had  to  step  over 
arrangements  of  little  sharpened  sticks,  placed  loosely  together  in  a 

>  This  idea  of  throwing  peppers  into  a  fire  appears  to  have  been  an  old  trick.  It  is  stated  by  Captain 
Jean-Pierre  that,  when  the  old  Oyampis,  of  the  upper  Yary ,  Cayenne,  wished  to  stop  an  enemy,  they  sur- 
rounded their  village  with  a  circle  of  flie  into  which  they  threw  handfuls  of  dry  capsicums.  It  is  impossible 
to  fight  when  one  is  seized  with  an  unconquerable  sneeting  (Cr,  271). 


294  ANIMISM   AKD  FOLK-LORE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS   [eth.  ANN.  30 

variety  of  ways.  These,  the  guide  said,  were  put  by  the  Indians 
using  this  path  for  the  purpose  of  keeping  the  pumas  and  jaguars 
from  traversing  it.  These  sticks  were  not  meant  to  injiu-e  the 
animals,  in  fact  they  were  too  loosely  stuck  up  for  that,  but  were 
merely  intended  by  their  artificial  appearance  to  scare  oflF  the  tigers" 
(Bro,  198).  The  pointed  hardwood  sticks,  stuck  into  the  ground, 
guarding  the  pathways  leading  to  the  houses  of  the  Akawaios  (Ba, 
268-9),  of  the  Oyapock  River  Indians  (Cr,  169),  and  others,  may 
have  been  employed  for  corresponding  reasons,  although  other  reasons 
have  been  given.  The  same  may  be  said  of  the  following:  "Before 
leaving  a  temporary  camp  in  the  forest,  where  they  have  kiUed  a 
tapir  and  dried  the  meat  on  a  babracot,  Indians  invariably  destroy 
this  babracot,  saying  that  should  a  tapir,  passing  that  way,  find 
traces  of  the  slaughter  of  one  of  his  kind,  he  would  come  by  night  on 
the  next  occasion,  when  Indians  slept  at  that  place,  and,  taking  a 
man,  would  babracote  him  in  revenge"  (IT,  352).  In  Cayenne, 
between  the  upper  Yary  and  Parou  Rivers,  Cr6vaux  (252)  makes 
this  interesting  note:  "I  see  ten  boucans  disposed  in  a  line  along  the 
pathway.  What  puzzles  me  is  that  there  is  no  fire  beneath.  Another 
thing,  instead  of  being  charged  with  smoked  meat,  they  are  covered 
with  several  bUlets  of  dry  wood  alternating  with  stones.  I  learn 
that  these  altars  .  .  .  have  been  made  by  ten  hunters  of  a  neighbor- 
ing village  who  started  some  days  ago  on  a  big  expedition.  Every 
time  the  Roucouyennes  go  hunting  (shooting  with  arrows)  the 
quatta  monkey,  they  stop  to  trim  these  boucans."  * 

344.  An  Indian  must  never  himseK  bring  into  the  house  any  game 
that  he  has  caught,  but  leave  it  for  his  wife  to  carry  in  if  she  has 
been  accompanying  him;  otherwise  he  will  place  it  on  the  pathway, 
some  four  roods  or  so  from  the  house,  whence  the  women-folk  will 
fetch  it.  Pitou  gives  a  very  interesting  example  of  this  from  Cayenne 
(LAP,  n,  220,  et  seq.).  Similarly,  with  fish — unless  very  small,  or 
unless  there  is  only  a  single  one  that  he  can  carry  on  the  stick  with 
which  he  has  skewered  its  giBs — ^he  never  brings  them  into  the  house, 
but  makes  his  wife  go  fetch  them  from  the  waterside.  The  reason  given 
for  this  custom  is  that,  were  the  food  to  be  brought  home  direct  by 
the  man  he  would  have  bad  luck  in  fishing  or  hunting  on  the  next 
occasion.  A  similar  practice  is  recorded  from  Cayenne  and  from  the 
islands.  When  the  men  (Roucouyennes)  return  from  the  chase, 
they  bring  the  game  as  far  as  the  edge  of  the  forest,  whither  the 
women  go  to  fetch  it  (Cr,  283).  Carib  Island  women  go  and  fetch 
the  venison  from  the  spot  where  it  has  fallen,  and  the  fish  on  the 

1  It  is  only  proper  to  state  that  Crdvaux  gives  it  as  Us  opinion  that  the  object  of  these  boucans  is  to  placate 
(calmer)  Yolock,  the  Bush  Spirit,  who  can  prevent  them  IriUing  game.  With  this  opinion,  however,  I  am 
unable  to  agree,  but  can  only  regard  these  structures  as  having  something  to  do  in  the  way  of  protection 
from  the  injuries  which  one  might  reasonably  expect  the  slaughtered  monkeys  would  do  their  best  fco 
inflict.— W.  E.  R. 


BOTH]  BESTEICTIONS  295 

banks  of  the  stream  (RoP,  493).  When  they  have  caught  anything, 
they  leave  it  on  the  spot,  and  the  women  were  formerly  obliged  to 
go  and  fetch  it  to  the  house. 

345.  Among  the  Pomeroon  Arawaks,  when  an  animal  is  killed 
with  an  arrow-trap  or  a  gun-trap,  its  flesh  has  to  be  cooked  in  a  pot 
without  a  cover,  over  a  fire  which  is  not  too  large,  so  as  to  avoid  any 
water  boiling  over.  Were  either  of  these  matters  not  attended  to, 
there  would  be  no  further  use  either  for  the  arrow  or  for  the  gun,  as 
aU  the  game  of  the  same  kind  as  that  recently  trapped  would  take 
its  departure  to  another  region. 

246.  Among  the  Arawaks  it  would  seem  that  food  in  general  was 
not  allowed  to  be  eaten  after  nightfall,  any  person  guilty  of  this 
offence  being  invariably  changed  into  an  animal.  The  story  of  the 
man  who  dined  after  dark  (Sect.  lUf)  has  reference  to  this  belief. 
The  origin  of  such  a  custom  it  is  somewhat  difficult  to  trace.  That 
it  can  not  be  due  to  any  desire  to  prevent  exposure  to  the  enemy 
through  the  lights  of  the  fires  required  for  cooking  is  evident  from 
the  fact  that  fires  for  purposes  of  warmth,  protection  from  jaguars, 
and  other  beasts  of  prey  may  be  kept  burning  all  night.  It  may  be 
due  to  some  such  superstition  as  is  met  with  among  the  Jivaros  of 
the  Pintuc,  the  Pioj6s  of  the  Putumayo  (upper  Amazon),  and  others, 
who  argue  that  all  food  which  remains  in  the  stomach  overnight  is 
unwholesome  and  undigested,  and  should  therefore  be  removed; 
accordingly  they  have  the  habit  of  inducing  vomiting  every  morning 
by  the  use  of  a  feather  (AS,  93). 

347.  On  the  Amazons,  "  the  children,  more  particularly  the  females, 
are  restricted  to  a  particular  food:  they  are  not  allowed  to  eat  the 
meat  of  any  kind  of  game,  nor  of  fish,  except  the  very  small  bony 
kinds ;  their  food  principally  consisting  of  mandiocca-cake  and  fruits  " 
(AKW,  345).  We  must  accept  with  caution  the  opinion  imphed  or 
expressed  by  various  authorities  that  each  nation  as  such  differs  from 
the  others  with  respect  to  the  indigenous  foods  from  the  use  of  which  the 
people  abstain.  A  certain  food  may  be  taboo  to  any  one  or  more  indi- 
viduals, independently  of  membership  in  a  certain  tribe,  at  the  instiga- 
tion of  a  medicine-man  as  a  part  of  the  treatment  for  Ulness,  on  account 
of  his  wife's  condition,  or  for  other  reasons.  While  we  have  the  defi- 
nite assurance  of  Schomburgk  that  the  Caribs  never  eat  monkeys  (ScR, 
II,  434),  Gumilla  says  that  each  nation  is  fond  of  one  kind  of  monkey 
but  loathes  the  others.  The  Achaguas  are  very  fond  of  the  yellow 
ones,  which  they  call  arabata,  the  Tunevos  like  the  black  ones,  while 
the  Jiraras,  Ayricos,  Betoyes,  and  other  nations  prefer  the  white  ones 
(G,  I,  260).  The  present-day  Pomeroon  Caribs  will  eat  neither  arma- 
dillo, alligator,  camudi,  nor  monkey,  but  no  reasons  for  such  restric- 
tions are  obtainable.     Kappler  speaks  of  the  Surinam  Indians  refus- 


296  ANIMISM   AND  FOLK-LOBE   OF- GUIANA  INDIANS   [eth.  ANN.  30 

ingtoeat  snakes  and  large  sea-turtles  (AK,  188).  "All  tribes  .  .  . 
agree  in  refusing  to  eat  the  flesh  of  such  animals  as  are  not  indig- 
enous to  their  country  but  were  introduced  from  abroad,  such  as 
oxen,  sheep  [pigs],  goats,  and  fowls ;  ...  It  must,  however,  be  added 
that,  under  great  pressure  of  circumstances,  such  as  utter  want  of 
other  food,  these  meats  are  occasionally  rendered  eatable  by  the 
simple  ceremony  of  getting  a  piaiman,  or  even  occasionally  an  old 
woman  [who  may  play  the  r61e  of  piai],  to  blow  a  certain  number  of 
times  on  them ;  apparently  on  the  principle  that  the  spirit  of  the 
animal  about  to  be  eaten  is  thus  expelled"  (IT,  368).  Schomburgk 
tells  us  how  the  aversion  to  European  pork  was  never  so  strongly 
met  with  as  among  the  Wapisianas;  at  Watu-ticaba  Village  the 
indisposition  of  a  little  girl  was  considered  due  to  the  circumstance  that 
his  cook,  who  had  helped  the  child  carry  wood  and  water,  had  given 
her  some  to  eat  (ScR,  ii,  389).  In  Cayenne,  they  do  not  eat  fowls 
(poules)  and  other  birds  though  they  be  delicious;  they  imagine  that 
out  of  spite  these  animals  would  cut  their  stomachs  to  pieces,  gnaw 
their  intestines,  and  cause  frightful  colic  with  the  beak  and  spurs, 
although  only  the  meat  portion  should  be  eaten  (PBa,  231).  The 
bush-negroes  at  ApikoUos  Village  (Surinam)  said  that  aU  the  Trios 
Indians  would  die  because  the  Europeans  had  partaken  of  the  same 
food  as  they  had  (Go,  22).  All  the  old  piais  that  I  have  met  stiU 
persist  in  their  refusal  to  partake  of  European  food  (Sect.  286). 

348.  Food  may  be  restricted  or  taboo  only  under  special  circum- 
stances, as  at  an  eclipse  of  the  moon  (Sect.  200).  In  Cayenne, 
apparently  men  and  women  rehgiously  abstain  during  the  period  of 
mourning  from  eating  certain  meats,  or  from  cutting  large  timber, 
and  several  other  practices  of  this  nature  (PBa,  229).  The  whole 
family  may  be  restricted  in  the  way  of  food,  when  a  member  of  it 
happens  to  be  ill  (Sect.  317).  The  taboos  of  various  foods  at  the 
physiological  periods  of  a  man's  or  a  woman's  hfe  are  noted  elsewhere 
(Sects.  267-284).  Among  the  Makusis,  during  the  time  that  the 
natural  colors  of  the  feathers  are  being  artificially  altered  the  owner 
of  the  bird  eats  very  sparingly  and  chiefly  of  certain  kinds  of  food 
(Ti,  1882,  p.  28).  The  Island  Caribs  eat  flesh  only  when  there  are 
strangers  at  table;  otherwise,  they  hunt  but  for  lizards  and  fish:  it 
is  only  on  those  special  occasions  when  they  want  to  entertain  their 
European  friends  or  for  purposes  of  trade  and  barter,  that  they  hunt 
anything  else  (RoP,  506).  "When  they  have  to  cross  over  sea  to 
go  to  another  island  Uke  St.  Alousi,  or  St.  Vincent,  they  eat  no  crabs 
or  lizards,  because  these  animals  live  in  holes:  consequently  this 
would  prevent  them  getting  to  another  land"  (BBR,  245).  An 
Indian  does  not  eat  an  animal  that  he  may  have  domesticated  and 
tamed. 


BOTH]  EESTBICTIONS  297 

249.  Unlike  what  might  have  been  expected  from  a  consideration 
of  other  savage  races,  even  so  near  as  those  of  North  Anaerica,  there 
seems  to  be  no  record  of  the  taboo  of  the  so-called  totem-animal, 
but  I  can  not  assume  for  this  reason  that  such  taboo  is,  or  was,  non- 
existent. As  a  matter  of  fact,  during  the  whole  course  of  my  anno- 
tation of  all  available  hterature  relative  to  the  Guiana  Indians,  I 
can  find  but  one  statement  bearing  on  the  question  and  that  in  the 
negative.  This  is  from  Cr^vaux  (523).  On  the  Guaviar,  a  branch 
of  the  Orinoco,  he  found  an  Indian  who,  although  a  Piapoco  (i.  e. 
Toucan),  had  no  quahns  about  killing  the  bird  after  which  his 
tribe  was  named.  All  the  other  references  are  of  doubtful  totemic^ 
significance. 

350.  Certain  indigenous  animals  are  not  to  be  e^ten,  apparently 
for  no  assignable  cause.  On  the  Moruca,  the  Arawaks  do  not  use 
the  flesh  of  the  Palamedea  comuta  Lion.,  although  they  employ  the 
tail  feathers  for  arrow-barbs  (ScR,  n,  457).  While  the  Makusis 
touch  the  flesh  of  the  ant-bear  only  when  forced  by  want,  the  Caribs 
regard  it  as  the  greatest  dehcacy  (ScR,  n,  434).  So  also  the  Uaupes 
Indians  do  not  eat  the  large  wild  pig  {Dicotyles  labiatus),  the  anta 
{Tapirus  americanus),  or  the  white-nunped  mutim  {Crax  globicera'i) 
(ARW,  337).  In  the  Pomeroon  when  men  kiU  a  bush-hog  or  any 
other  anunal  that  happens  to  contain  young,  there  are  always  to  be 
found  Indians  who  will  not  touch  the  flesh.  Other  animals  wiU  be 
avoided  for  more  or  less  defined  reasons.  Thus,  the  savannah  pewit 
{Vanellas  cayennensis)  is  never  eaten  by  Indians,  as  they  say  that  par- 
taking of  its  flesh  produces  deafness  (Bro,  104).  At  Carichana,  near 
River  Meta,  Orinoco,  the  Piaroas  said  that  the  people  of  their  tribe  in- 
faUibly  die  when  tl^  eat  of  the  manati  (AVH,  n,  492).  In  Surinam, 
an  old  Trio  informed  de  Goeje  that  he  would  never  eat  the  head  of  a 
quatta  monkey,  because  his  mother  had  told  him  that  he  would  get 
gray  hair  like  it,  and  women  consider  gray  hair  hateful  (Go,  22). 
Though  hog  and  turtle  were  abundant  on  the  islands,  the  Caribs 
there  eat  neither,  for  the  assigned  reasons  that  their  eyes  might 
become  small  Hke  the  former  animal,  that  they  might  participate  in 
the  clumsiness  and  stupidity  of  the  latter  (RoP,  465).  The  attributes 
of  the  animal  eaten  could  be  transferred  by  ingestion  not  only  to  the 
person  eating  [compare  ingestion  of  human  flesh  to  obtain  attributes 
of  the  deceased,  in  Sect.  77],  but  even  to  the  child  of  such  person 
(Sect.  879).  The  Zaparo  Indians  of  the  Napo  River  (upper  Amazon) 
are  "very  particular  in  their  diet:  unless  from  necessity,  they  wiU,  in 
most  cases,  not  eat  any  heavy  meats  such  as  tapir  and  peccary,  but 
confine  themselves  to  birds,  monkeys,  deer,  fish,  etc.,  principally 
because  they  argue  that  the  heavier  meats  make  them  also  iinwieldy, 
like  the  animals  who  supply  the  flesh,  impeding  their  agility  and 
unfitting  them  for  the  chase"  (AS,  168).     On  the  upper  Amazon  the 


298  ANIMISM  AN0  FOLK-LOEE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS   [eth.  ANN.  30 

flesh  of  the  male  turtle  (much  less  numerous  than  the  female)  is  con- 
sidered unwholesome,  especially  to  sick  people  having  external  signs 
of  inflammation  (HWB,  309). 

351.  Dogs  also  are  precluded  from  eating  certain  foods.  In 
Cayenne  Cr^Taux  noticed  that  his  Koucouyenne  cooks  threw  the 
beaks  of  the  kinoros  birds  (Ara  canga)  into  the  river,  in  the  behef 
that  were  their  dogs  to  eat  them,  they  (the  dogs)  would  be  poisoned 
(Cr,  284).  Here,  on  the  Pomeroon,  in  many  an  Indian  house  you 
will  often  find  stuck  under  the  eaves  of  the  overhanging  troolie  roof, 
or  slimg  up  in  a  basket,  the  wings  and  breast-bones  of  certain  birds, 
and  often  the  bones  of  a  labba  ox  an  acouri.  It  was  a  long  time  before 
I  learned -that  they  were  placed  there  for  a  purpose  other  than  orna- 
ment or  decoration.  If  a  dog  were  to  eat  either  of  those  particular 
bird  bones  or  any  bones  whatever  of  a  labba  or  an  acouri  that  it  had 
not  itself  hunted,  such  dog  would  never  catch  any  of  these  animals 
again.* 

353.  The  temporary  occlusion  of  vision,  as  with  tobacco  and  pep- 
pers, on  the  occasion  of  visiting  for  the  first  time  any  strikingly 
peculiar  landmark  of  natural  scenery,  especially  in  the  way  of  moun- 
tains, or  even  on  entering  a  new  region,  would  seem  to  have  been  a 
custom  very  prevalent  among  the  Indians.  From  the  examples 
which  I  propose  here  submitting  it  will  be  seen  that  the  procedure 
specially  concerns  the  particular  Spirit  with  which  such  landmark  or 
region  is  connected.  Its  object,  partly  perhaps  to  placate  this 
Spirit,  and  so  turn  aside  the  sickness  or  any  other  evil  it  might  other- 
wise choose  to  send,  is  mainly  to  prevent  the  visiting  individual 
attracting  it  toward  himself.  The  procedure  is  protective  or  defensive 
in  the  sense  of  thwarting  evil.  On  first  gaining  gjght  of  the  Arissaro 
HiUs,  Essequibo  River,  the  Caribee  Indians,  who  had  never  ascended 
the  river  so  far,  had  to  undergo  an  initiatory  sight,  which  consisted  in 
squeezing  tobacco  juice  into  their  eyes  (ScG,  229).  So  again,  at  the 
Twasinkie  or  Coomootie  Mountains,  much  superstition,  as  usual,  was 
attached  to  them,  and  those  who  had  never  seen  them  before  were 
obhged  to  drink  lime  juice,  and  to  have  tobacco  water  squeezed  into 
their  eyes  to  avert  the  Evil  Spirit  (ScG,  231).  Im  Thurn  (368) 
speaks  of  peppers  (Capsicum)  being  employed  for  a  similar  purpose, 
and  says:  "Once,  when  neither  peppers  nor  limes  were  at  hand,  a 
piece  of  blue  indigo-dyed  cloth  was  carefiilly  soaked  and  the  dye  was 
then  rubbed  into  the  eyes."  While  on  the  Cuywini,  writes  Barring- 
ton  Brown:  "We  passed  a  place  one  afternoon  where  the  river  was 
studded  with  high  granite  rocks  two  of  which  rose  ten  feet  or  so 
above  the  level  of  the  highest  floods.  .  .  .  Our  guide,  Edward  .  .  . 
turned  his  head  away  and  would  not  look  at  them.     Eruma,  one  of 

■  The  alligator  skull  stuck  up  in  the  Carib  houses  servos  a  different  purpose;  it  keeps  away  the  Bush 
Spirit,  the  Yurokon. 


BOTH]  BESTBICTIONS  299 

OUT  Caribs,  took  some  tobacco,  and  dipping  it  into  the  water,  leaned 
back  and  squeezed  the  juice  into  his  eyes,  and  as  soon  as  the  tears 
thus  produced  had  subsided,  he  cahnly  gazed  upon  the  rocks" 
(Bro,  30).  Near  the  mouth  of  the  Cuywini  River,  upper  Essequibo, 
to  quote  the  same  author,  "were  some  large  granite  rocks  in  passing 
which  our  Carib  .  .  .  turned  away  his  face  in  an  opposite  direction. 
Upon  questioning  him  as  to  his  reason  for  so  doing,  I  learned  that  if 
he  looked  at  them,  he  would  get  fever"  (Bro,  244).  Another  interest- 
ing extract  is  from  Jenman  (23) : 

We  met  on  the  Savannah  about  a  hundred  Indians  of  all  ages  and  both  sexes,  resting 
on  their  way  down  to  the  hill  to  the  landing  at  Tukeit,  going  down  to  the  Mission. 
It  was  the  first  time  they  had  passed  the  "Kaietuk"  (Kaieteur)  as  they  called  it, 
though  they  were  careful  to  keep  almost  beyond  the  sound  of  its  roar  and  far  out  of 
sight  of  it.  Each  one,  from  the  newly-born  baby  in  arms,  to  the  oldest  man  and 
woman,  had  pepper-juice  applied  to  the  balls  of  the  eyes,  carefully  inserted  within 
the  lids,  with  a  small  loop  made  of  a  finely  twisted  piece  of  Tibesiri  [Mauritia  fiber]  to 
avert  any  evil  which  might  otherwise  befall  them  from  having  come  near  the  Fall 
and  into  a  new  part  of  the  country.  Its  application  appeared  to  give  acute  pain  for 
a  short  time,  and  brought  a  copious  flow  of  tears.  Some  courageously  just  kept  the 
eyelids  open  without  touching  them;  others,  with  less  nerve,  had  to  hold  theirs 
open.     .  .  .  The  pepper- juice  .      .  was  applied  by  one  man,  a  middle-aged  person. 

The  present-day  Arawaks  when  visiting  any  new  place  for  the 
first  time,  whether  now  connected  with  Spirits  or  not,  put  creek  water 
or  river  water  into  their  eyes:  they  tell  me  here  that  it  is  with  the 
object  of  placating  any  spirits  that  may  be  lurking  in  the  vicinity, 
for  should  they  neglect  the  custom,  the  Yawahus  might  not  only 
send  them  sore  eyes,  but  many  other  sicknesses.  One  woman  main- 
tained that,  independently  of  any  evil  spirits,  the  very  novelty 
of  the  scene  might  give  her  sore  eyes,  in  the  absence  of  the  usual 
precaution. 

353.  Warraus  assure  me  that  on  looking  at  a  moimtain  for  the 
first  time  the  eyes  are  shut  to  prevent  the  person  attracting  or  draw- 
ing the  Shadow  of  the  Spirit  toward  him  (Sect.  190).  When  one 
person  looks  at  another,  the  former  draws  or  drags  the  latter's  shadow 
(Sect.  68)  toward  him,  a  principle  on  which  these  Indians  explain  the 
taking  of  a  photograph.  The  Island  Carib  corpse  is  laid  out  with 
two  weights  on  the  eyes,  that  he  may  not  see  his  parents  thus  making 
them  iU  (Sect.  80).  Catlin  gives  an  amusing  instance  among  the 
Conibos  of  the  Amazon,  of  the  local  medicine-man  preventing  hitn 
painting  any  more  portraits  by  exhorting  the  tribesmen  as  follows: 
"These  things  are  a  great  mystery,  but  there  you  are,  my  friends, 
with  your  eyes  open  all  night — they  never  shut :  this  is  all  wrong  and 
you  are  very  foolish  to  allow  it.  You  never  will  be  happy  afterwards 
if  you  allow  these  things  to  be  always  awake  in  the  night.  ^ly 
friends,  this  is  only  a  cunning  way  this  man  has  to  get  your  skins; 
and  the  next  thing  they  will  have  glass  eyes,  and  be  placed  among 
the  skins  of  the  wild  beasts  and  birds  and  snakes."     (The  medicine- 


300  ANIMISM   AND  FOLK-LOEE   OP   GUIANA  INDIANS   [bth.  ann.  30 

man  had  been  to  Para  or  some  other  place  where  he  had  seen  the 
stuffed  skins  in  a  museum.)  (GO,  321-323) .  For  a  pregnant  woman 
to  look  at  the  face  of  a  corpse  will  draw  trouble  on  her  unborn  child 
(Sect.  279).  It  is  possible  that,  perhaps  on  principles  analogous  to 
some  of  the  preceding,  most  European  races  have  adopted  the  practice 
of  closing  the  eyes  when  in  the  attitude  of  prayer;  it  is  therefore 
not  so  very  remarkable  that  I  found  the  aboriginal  conununicants 
of  a  certain  Mission  speaking  of  prayer  generally  by  a  term  which, 
literally  translated,  means  "to  shut  the  eyes." 

354.  But  this  temporary  occlusion  of  the  eyes  may  be  accompanied 
with  another  procedure,  that  of  whipping.  Thus,  at  the  Cara-utta 
Eocks,  head  of  Wenamu  River,  a  branch  of  the  Cuyuni,  "the  Indians 
who  had  never  been  here  before,  gave  themselves  up  to  the  wildest 
orgies.  Several  calabashes  were  placed  on  the  rocks,  before  which 
two  old  Arekunas,  with  faces  turned  toward  the  north,  squatted, 
and  murmured  unintelligible  words,  whUe  an  equally  old  piai  rubbed 
powdered  capsicum  into  the  eyes  of  each  of  the  novices.  When  the 
first  pains  were  over,  they  broke  twigs  off  from  the  nearest  bushes, 
and  whipped  one  another  on  the  legs  and  feet,  untU  blood  was 
drawn"  (ScE,  ii,  346).  In  the  last  group  of  cases,  it  is  not  the  body, 
but  the  rock  or  other  natural  feature  that  is  whipped.  And  so  it 
happens  that  whUe  Boddam-Whetham  admits  that  they  wUl  never 
point  at  certain  rocks  with  a  finger,  although  one's  attention  may  be 
drawn  to  them  by  an  inclination  of  the  head,  other  rocks  "they  beat 
with  green  boughs"  (BW,  182);  that  along  the  slopes  of  the  Seroun 
Mountains,  Mazaruni  River,  under  some  of  the  enormous  masses  of 
conglomerate  rock,  were  fiowers  and  green  branches  that'  had  been 
offered  to  the  Rock  Spirits  by  the  superstitious  natives  (BW,  190). 
But  as  this  author  may  have  obtained  his  information  concerning  the 
very  same  place  (Seroun  River  valley)  from  Brown's  work,  published 
a  couple  of  years  before,  I  quote  from  the  latter  as  well:  "On  the 
way  we  passed  a  very  large  isolated  rock  of  diorite  which  had  formed 
part  of  one  of  the  great  layers  of  this  rock,  horizontally  bedded  in 
the  sandstone,  upon  which  were  lying  the  bruised  remains  of  a  small 
tree  branch  with  many  more  around  its  base.  These  were  offerings 
left  by  Indian  travelers  at  the  shrine  of  the  spirit  of  this  rock,  who 
believe  that  if  they  did  not  perform  the  rite  of  breaking  off  a  green 
bough  and  beating  it  on  the  rock,  evil  would  assuredly  befall  them" 
(Br.,  78). 

255.  In  a  sense  analogous  to  the  idea  of  thwarting  or  avoiding  evil 
may  probably  be  regarded  the  closing  of  the  eyes  as  a  sign  of  "envy, 
hatred,  and  malice."  Thus,  among  Warraus  and  Arawaks,  as  between 
man  with  man  or  woman  with  woman,  the  angered  one  wiU  look  at 
the  other,  suddenly  shut  the  eyes,  keep  them  closed  a  few  seconds, 
and  then  turn  away.  The  person  thus  treated  wiU  know  that  he  or 
she  must  be  prepared  for  the  coming  storm.     So  also  the  following 


BOTH]  EESTBICTIONS  301 

occuirence  reported  from  the  Parou  River  in  Cayenne  may  find 
place  here:  "In  a  retired  spot,  I  surprise  a  little  girl  who,  like  the 
ostrich,  hides  her  face  in  a  hole,  leaving  her  body  entirely  exposed ' ' 
(Cr,  273).  It  is  possible  that  the  peppering  of  the  witch's  eyes 
before  clubbing  her  was  intended  to  prevent  the  poor  wretcli  attract- 
ing toward  herself  the  Spirits  of  those  people  she  might  otherwise 
have  looked  at  (Sect.  319).  Compare  also  the  binding  of  the  girl's 
eyes  in  the  puberty  ceremony  (Sect.  271) . 

356.  The  closing  of  the  eyes  and  the  concurrent  expression  of  a 
wish  I  am  unable  to  obtain  explanations  for,  except  on  the  hypo- 
thesis of  some  Spirit  being  supplicated,  and  deal  with  the  practice 
here  only  as  a  matter  of  convenience.  Mention  is  made  of  the  custom 
in  the  Carib  story  of — 

"Shut  Yotm  Eyes  and  Wish!"   (C) 

There  were  two  brothers,  and  each  had  set  a  apring  trap  to  catch  Maipuri  [tapir] 
but  it  had  proved  too  smart  for  them.  One  day  the  younger  came  home  and  said, 
"  I  have  caught  a  bush-cow. ' '  This  made  the  elder  one  jealous,  and  hence  his  remark, 
"If  you  have  fooled  me,  I  will  kill  you."  So  they  went  together  into  the  bush,  and 
sure  enough  there  was  the  tapir  caught  by  the  leg  in  the  trap.  The  elder  brother 
thereupon  killed  the  beast,  cut  up  the  meat,  and  took  it  all  for  himself,  leaving  only 
the  entrails  for  the  younger.  The  latter  returned  home,  and  telling  his  mother  how 
greedy  her  first-bom  had  been,  prevailed  upon  her  to  leave  the  place  with  him.  When 
they  had  traveled  a  great  distancu,  they  reached  a  hill,  and  the  son  said:  "Mother! 
Shut  your  eyes,  and  say,  '  I  want  a  field  here,  with  plantains  and  potatoes,  together 
with  a  house  right  in  its  very  center.' "  The  old  woman  did  what  she  had  been  told, 
and  lo,  and  beholdl  there  she  had  exactly  what  she  had  asked  for.  The  two  of  them 
remained  there  for  a  long  period,  quite  happy  and  content,  but  the  mother  was  getting 
old  now.  So  the  son  said,  "  Mother!  Shut  your  eyes,  and  say,  '  I  want  to  be  a  young 
girl  again.' "  This  she  did,  and  her  wish  was  immediately  granted,  she  becoming 
so  very  sweet  and  attractive  that  her  son  became  quite  proud  of  her  and  wanted 
other  people  to  see  her  also.  Indeed,  this  made  him  say,  "  Mother!  Shut  your  eyes, 
and  say,  'I  wish  my  big  son  would  come  see  me.' "  No  sooner  said  than  done,  and 
the  elder  brother  put  in  his  appearance.  Now  that  they  had  a  visitor,  they  must  of 
course  have  paiwarri,  so  the  younger  brother  told  his  mother  as  before  to  shut  her 
eyes  and  wish  for  drinks — and  accordingly  they  had  a  big  jar  of  paiwarri.  All  three 
of  them  drank,  and  the  big  brother  became  beastly  intoxicated,  so  much  so  that  he 
commenced  trying  to  take  liberties  with  the  pretty  young  woman.  "  How  dare  you! " 
expostulated  the  younger  one.  "  Don't  you  know  that  she  is  your  mother?  "  "  No! 
I  don't,"  replied  the  elder,  "and  what  is  more,  I  don't  believe  it,"  and  as  he  insisted 
upon  attempting  to  carry  out  his  wicked  designs,  the  two  men  fought.  When  the 
elder  brother  finally  awoke  from  his  drunken  brawl,  he  found  himself  all  alone  in  a 
strange  broken-down  old  hut,  and  so  he  returned  home  disconsolate. 

The  Makusis  also  would  seem  to  have  had  similar  ideas  about 
wishing,  for  in  their  legend  of  Pia  and  Makunaima  the  former  tells 
his  mother  that  whatever  of  good  she  desired  she  would  obtain  if 
she  would  bow  her  head  and  cover  her  face  with  her  hands  while 
she  expressed  her  wish  (Sect.  41). 

257.  It  was  a  superstition  of  the  Indians  in  Cayenne  that  the  first 
person  to  see  the  dancers  arrive  at  the  actual  place  of  entertainment 


302  ANIMISM  AND   FOLK-LOKE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS   [eth.  ann.  30 

would  die  during  tlie  course  of  the  year  or  meet  with  other  misfor- 
tune. Hence,  directly  the  dancers  left  the  public  meeting-house 
Qcarbet)  to  go  to  a  retired  spot  for  the  purpose  of  decorating  them- 
selves, the  audience  took  good  care  to  go  into  hiding,  and  to  return 
ia  a  body,  shouting  and  screaming  Hke  madmen,  when  the  performers 
put  in  their  appearance  (PBa,  201;  LAP,  ii  242). 

358.  The  following  are  examples  of  what  might  be  called  restric- 
tions in  arts,  crafts,  and  manufactures. 

On  the  left  bank  of  the  mouth  of  the  Cuyuni  is  a  small  hill  whither 
Indians  come  from  long  distances  to  obtain  clay,  which  is  beheved 
to  be  especially  desirable.  Schomburgk  tells  of  a  certain  superstition 
which  accounts  for  such  large  numbers  of  people  congregating  there. 
The  Indians  believe,  for  instance,  that  only  during  the  first  night  of  the 
incoming  fuU  moon  (Sect.  199)  dare  they  carry  on  their  business. 
Hence,  numbers  of  people  congregate  at  these  times,  as  Bernau 
vouches  for,  and  at  break  of  day  start  for  home  laden  with  a  large 
quantity.  The  Indians  cling  fast  to  the  superstition  that  if  the  clay 
is  obtained  at  any  other  times,  the  vessels  acquire  an  evil  peculiarity 
not  only  for  becoming  speedUy  broken,  but  also  for  bringing  numerous 
diseases  to  him  who  eats  out  of  them. 

359.  Such  vessels  could  be  even  more  intimately  associated  with 
Spirit  Hfe,  as  witness  the  following  story  of— 

The  -LtrcKY  Pot  (W) 

On  his  way  home  from  the  bush  one  day  a  man  came  across  a  banab,  with  no  human 
occupants  but  with  a  Pot  simmering  on  the  fire.  The  Pot  addressed  him,  asking  if 
he  were  hungry,  and  having  received  an  affirmative  reply,  said,  "All  right!  I  will  cook 
bird  for  you,"  and  began  to  boil.  When  ready,  the  man  ate  of  the  contents,  and  went 
home.  His  wife  put  fish  before  him,  but  he  said,  "  I  do  not  want  it.  I  am  satisfied." 
By  and  by  her  husband  made  an  excuse  to  leave  the  house,  and  having  arrived  at  the 
banab,  said  to  the  Pot,  "  I  am  hungry.  You  must  cook  meat  now."  So  the  Pot  boiled 
away  and  supplied  him  with  pure  bush-hog.  When  he  got  home  his  wife  put  some 
cassava  before  him,  but  he  said,  "  I  do  not  want  it;  my  belly  is  full."  After  remaining 
at  home  two  days  and  refusing  the  food  which  his  wife  regularly  brought  him,  he  paid 
another  visit  to  the  lucky  Pot,  gorged  himsalf  with  both  bird  and  meat,  and  returned 
home  again,  where,  as  before,  he  assured  his  wife  that  he  was  satisfied  and  wanted 
for  nothing.  Now  the  two  sons  looked  at  him  and  at  one  another  and  then  whispered 
to  themselves;  "What  does  this  mean?  Our  father  stays  at  home  two  whole  days 
and  is  not  hungry.  He  goes  into  the  bush  and  even  when  he  returns  will  not  eat. 
Whence  does  he  procure  his  food?  "  So  they  watched  his  movements,  and  next  day, 
following  him  at  a  distance,  saw  him  talk  to  the  Pot  and  help  himself.  On  his  return 
home,  he  still  refused  to  eat  what  his  wife  continued  to  offer  him.  As  they  were  getting 
short  of  food  for  the  household,  he  went  away  to  shoot  morokot  [Jl/i/Zeto],  the  sons  in 
the  meanwhile  going  to  the  banab,  asking  Pot  to  cook  bird  and  meat  for  them.  After 
eating  they  washed  the  vessel  "  clean,  clean,"  so  as  not  to  leave  even  the  trace  of  a 
smell  in  it.  By  and  by  the  father  came  home  from  his  fishing  excursion,  handed  over 
to  his  wife  the  morokot  which  he  had  caught,  but  refused  as  usual  to  eat  any  himself. 
"I  do  not  want  it.  I  am  satisfied,"  was  all  he  said.  He  then  slipped  away  to  his 
lucky  Pot,  and  told  it  to  cook  for  him,  but  it  would  not  boil  any  more  for  him  or  for 


KOTH]  EESTRICTIONS  303 

any  one  else,  so  perfectly  had  it  been  cleaned  out.*  He  then  commenced  to  cry,  but 
the  Pot  reminded  him:  "You  were  greedy.  You  gave  the  bird  and  meat  neither  to 
your  wife  nor  to  your  children.    You  ate  it  all  yourself." 

360.  Among  the  Island  Caribsj  when  the  women  make  hammocks 
they  place  at  each  end  a  small  parcel  of  ashes.  Unless  this  ceremony 
were  observed  the  hammock  would  not  last.  Should  they  eat  figs 
when  in  possession  of  a  new  hammock,  they  think  it  would  become 
rotten.  They  take  great  care  also  not  to  eat  of  certain  fish  %\ith 
sharp  teeth;  for  this  wo\ild  cause  the  hammock  to  be  soon  torn. 
The  men  erect  the  houses,  except  the  roofs,  which  are  made  by  the 
women,  and  canoes  (BBR,  242).  With  the  same  people,  during 
the  course  of  manufacture  of  a  canoe,  while  being  burnt  out,  sticks 
are  placed  across,  so  as  to  enlarge  it.  K  a  woman  did  but  touch  it 
with  her  fingers,  they  beUeve  it  would  spUt  (BBR,  243).  Father 
Gumilla,  the  missionary  of  the  Oriuoco,  evidently  commiserating 
the  xinhappy  lot  of  the  weaker  sex,  and  recognizing  the  hardships 
to  which  they  were  exposed  in  carrying  on  their  field  work,  made  the 
attempt  to  get  the  men  to  lend  assistance.  His  exhortation  with  its 
fruitless  results  is  given  here  in  his  own  words:  "Brethren,"  said  I 
to  them,  "why  don't  you  help  your  poor  women  to  plant?  They 
are  tired  with  the  heat,  working  with  their  babies  at  the  breast. 
Don't  you  see  that  it  is  making  both  them  and  your  children  sick?" 
"Father,"  they  rephed,  "you  don't  imderstand  these  things,  which 
accordingly  worry  you.  You  have  yet  to  learn  that  women  know 
how  to  bring  forth,  and  we  don't:  if  they  plant,  the  maize  stalk  gives 
two  or  three  ears  of  corn,  the  cassava  bush  yields  two  or  three 
basketsful  of  roots,  and  similarly  everything  is  multipUed"  (G,  ii,  237). 

261.  A  woman  must  preserve  her  fan  for  the  uses  for  which  it  is 
intended,  namely,  for  blowing  up  the  fire;  should  she  use  it  on  herself, 
she  would  become  thin — at  least  this  is  what  the  Pomeroon  Arawaks 
tell  me. 

Among  the  nations  bordering  on  the  Amazon  the  Indians  are 
entirely  nude.  They  regard  it  as  an  almost  certain  sign  that  he  who 
would  cover  what  shame  obhges  civilized  man  to  hide  would  soon  be 
unfortunate,  or  would  die  in  the  course  of  the  year  (PBa,  121-2). 
It  might  be  pardonable  perhaps  to  mention  here  the  reproof  which  the 
Island  Caribs  gave  their  Eiu-opean  visitors  when  the  latter,  regarding 
them  too  closely,  laughed  at  their  nudity:  "Friends!  You  should 
look  only  at  our  faces!"     (RoP,  461.) 

363.  Waterton  has  recorded  the  following  behefs  in  connection 
with  the  manufacture  of  curare  (wurah)  poison: 

The  women  and  young  girls  are  not  allowed  to  be  present.  The  shed  under  which 
it  has  been  boiled  is  pronounced  polluted  and  abandoned  ever  after.  He  who  makes 
the  poison  must  eat  nothing  that  morning  and  must  continue  fasting  as  long  as  the 

1  The  vessel  in  which  the  staple  Indian  dish  known  as  "pepper-pot"  is  daily  warmed,  cooked,  and 
added  to  from  time  to  time  is  never  cleaned. 


304  ANIMISM   AND  FOLK-LOEB   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS    [eth.  ANN.  30 

operation  lasts.  The  pot  in  wHch  it  is  boiled  must  be  a  new  one,  and  must  never  have 
held  anything  before,  otherwise  the  poison  would  be  deficient  in  strength;  add  to  this 
that  the  operator  must  take  particular  care  not  to  expose  himself  to  the  vapor  which 
arises  from  it  while  on  the  fire.  .  .  .  Still  the  Indians  think  that  it  affects  the  health; 
and  the  operator  either  is,  or  what  is  more  probable,  supposes  himself  to  be  sick,  for 
some  days  later  .  .  .  and  it  would  seem  that  they  imagine  it  affects  others  as  well  as 
him  who  boils  it;  for  an  Indian  agreed  one  evening  to  make  some  for  me,  but  the  next 
morning  he  declined  having  anything  to  do  with  it,  alleging  that  his  wife  was  with 
child!    [W,  93-1.] 

SclLomburgk  more  or  less  conjSrms  these  restrictions  when  he  says 
that  before  and  during  the  making  of  the  poison  the  operator  must 
submit  to  a  strict  fast,  and  that  during  the  cooking,  no  woman, 
especially  a  pregnant  woman,  or  maid  may  come  near  the  house; 
furthermore  his  own  wife  must  not  be  pregnant.  In  the  particular 
instance  cited  the  distinguished  traveler  was  asked  not  to  eat  sugar- 
cane or  sugar  during  the  manufacture  of  the  poison  (Sc,Ri,  455-7). 
"Thus  the  greater  the  abstention  from  food  on  the  part  of  the  peai 
men,  the  greater  the  virulence  of  the  urah,  its  action  being  supposed 
to  be  deadly  in  correspondence  with  the  degree  of  hunger  of  the  maker ' ' 
(J.  J.  Quelch,  Ti,  1895,  p.  262).  Im  Thurn  supphes  the  following: 
"Water  was  fetched  especially  for  the  poison-making  from  a  stream 
nearly  a  quarter  of  a  mile  distant;  and  care  was  taken  in  carrying 
this  to  the  house,  to  rest  it  on  the  ground  every  few  yards.  For, 
say  the  Indians,  a  bird  wounded  by  a  poisoned  dart  will  fly  only  as 
far  as  the  water,  with  which  the  poison  was  made,  was  carried  without 
rest"  (IT,  311). 

363.  There  would  appear  to  be  some  intimate  relationship  between 
an  individual  and  his  personal  name  (cf.  Sects.  124,  1^5),  of  such 
nature  that  the  very  mention  of  it  in  his  presence  would  be  fraught 
with  serious  consequences ;  neither,  as  in  the  case  of  spirits  (Sect.  172)  ^ 
may  he  be  pointed  at,  or  trodden  over  (Sect.  220).  The  name  is 
deemed  to  be  part  and  parcel  of  the  individual,  and  the  mention  of  it 
under  those  circumstances  would  put  him  in  the  power,  as  it  were, 
of  the  person  speaking.  This  rule  held  good  for  both  Mainland 
(KG,  I,  184;  II,  147)  and  Island  Indians.  According  to  age  and  sex, 
one  wUl  address  another  as  brother,  sister,  father,  mother,  son  or 
daughter,  etc.,  or  will  speak  of  him  or  her  as  the  father  or  mother, 
etc.,  of  such  an  one;  or,  to  specialize,  "they  will  speak  half  the  namie, 
e.  g.  Mala  instead  of  saying  Mala-kaaU,  and  Hiba  for  Hiba-lomon" 
(RoP,  451;  KG,  ii,  147).  This  fact  will  thus  render  the  following 
statements  of  de  Goeje  and  Kirke  more  intelligible:  "Some  Trios 
have  two  names,  one  reserved  for  friends,  the  other  for  strangers: 
Cr^vaux  says  that  the  Ojanas  might  have  two  names,  one  for  ad- 
dressing the  person  and  the  other  for  referring  to  him  when  absent" 
(Go,  26).  "It  is  a  curious  thing  that  you  can  never  discover  an 
Indian's  real  name  ...  he  never  divulges  it,  nor  is  he  ever  called 


BOTH]  EESTBICTIONS  305 

by  it.  He  is  always  known  by  some  nickname  or  name  of  distinction 
for  his  prowess  in  war,  hxinting,  or  fishing"  (Ki,  120).  So  also  when 
dead,  the  name  of  the  deceased  must  not  be  mentioned. 

;363A.    HONET-BEE    AND    THE    SWEET   DbINKS    (W) 

There  were  two  sisters  looking  after  their  brother,  for  whom  they  were  always  makiBg 
cassiri,  but  try  their  best,  the  drink  had  no  taste;  it  was  never  good  and  palatable, 
so  the  brother  did  not  enjoy  it.  He  was  forever  complaining,  saying  he  wished  he 
could  find  some  one  who  would  make  him  a  real  sweet  drink,  something  like  honey. 
His  sisters  sympathized,  and  said  they  would  be  only  too  glad  if  he  could  find  the  right 
woman,  who  would  make  good  liquor.  One  day  while  wandering  through  the  bush 
he  expressed  aloud  his  wishes  as  to  finding  some  woman  who  could  manufacture  a 
drink  as  sweet  as  the  honey-bee  makes  it.  No  sooner  had  he  expressed  his  wish  than 
he  heard  footsteps  behind,  and,  turning  round,  saw  a  female  approach.  "What  is  it? 
Where  are  you  going?  You  called  Koh6ra,  my  name  [lit.,  Honey-bee],  and  here  I 
am!"  He  told  her  about  his  own  and  his  sisteis'  wishes,  and  when  she  asked  him 
whether  he  thought  his  people  would  like  her,  he  said  he  was  quite  sure  they  would. 
Kohora  accordingly  went  home  with  him,  and  when  his  parents  asked  her  how  he 
had  met  her,  she  said  that  she  had  come  because  their  son  had  called  her.  She  then 
made  the  drink.  And  the  way  she  made  itl  All  she  had  to  do  was  to  put  her  little 
finger  into  the  water,  stir  it  up,  and  the  drink  was  ready!  It  tasted  sweet!  sweet!! 
sweet!!!  and  never  before  had  it  tasted  so  good.  From  that  time  onward  they  always 
had  sweet  drinks;  on  every  occasion  that  Kohora  brought  her  husband  water  she 
would  dip  her  little  finger  in  and  so  make  it  sweet.  But  at  last  the  man  got  tired  of 
all  this  sweet  drink,  and  began  to  quarrel  with  Kohora.  "Well,  that  is  funny,"  she 
said.  "You  wanted  sweet  drinks,  you  called  me  to  get  them  for  you.  I  came  and 
made  them,  and  yet  you  are  not  satisfied.  You  can  get  them  for  yourself  now!" 
With  this,  she  flew  away  and  ever  since  then,  people  have  been  punished  by  being 
put  to  all  the  trouble  of  climbing  up,  and  cutting  the  honey  out  of,  the  tree,  and  having 
to  clean  it  before  they  can  use  it  for  sweetening  purposes. 

364.  Among  the  Pomeroon  Arawaks  the  mother  always  gives  the 
name  first  to  her  child,  independently  of  the  piai,  who  bestows  one 
subsequently.  It  is  said  that  friends,  brothers,  and  sisters  may  call 
them  by  these  names,  which  stick  to  them  throughout  life,  but  it 
should  be  borne  in  mind  that  these  Arawaks  have  been  in  closer 
contact  with  Europeans  than  any  of  the  other  tribes.  The  following 
are  some  of  the  names  given  by  the  mother  at  birth: 

Girls'  names  Boys*  names 
Satu            =dariing 
Kakushika  =big  eyes 

Korelyaro   =baby  girl  Korelyali    =baby  boy 

Kai-inasaro=big  buttocks  =Kai-inasali 

Sato-bara    =pretty  hair  =Sachibara 

Kuroshiro   =  brown  hair  ==Knrashili 

Kabararo     =  plenty  of  hair  =Kabarali 

Kakarishiri=curly  hair  =KakarishiIi 

Irihibaro     =dark  hair  =Irihibali 

Ilihiro         =darkgiri  Ilihili          =dark  boy 
Natukoro    =sp.  of  pretty  flower      Deringko    =sp.  of  parrot 

Kuyari        =toucan  W6-shi        =sp.  of  little  fish 
Durakuaro  =bird  (Odontophorus) 

15961' — 30  ETH — 15 20 


306  ANIMISM  AND  POLK-LOEE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS   [bth.  ANN.  30 

The  name  bestowed  subsequently  in  this  tribe  by  the  piai  takes 
place  about  the  period  when  the  child  begins  to  creep;  he  asks  the 
Spirit  in  the  maraka  (rattle)  to  give  the  name.  "An  offeriag  of  con- 
siderable valae  is  necessary  on  this  occasion,  as,  according  to  the  fee 
given  to  propitiate  the  pe-i-inan,  is  the  virtue  of  the  incantations 
pronounced :  an  unnamed  Indian  is  thought  to  be  the  certain  victim 
of  the  first  sickness  or  misfortune  that  he  may  encounter :  accordingly, 
only  the  very  poorest, of  them  are  Avithout  names"  (HiC,  229).  At 
the  present  time,  it  would  seem  that  the  piai  gives  a  name  only  if 
he  has  been  called  in  to  attend  a  child  when  sick;  under  such  cir- 
cimostances  he  will  say  that  he  has  dreamed  that  the  child  requires  a 
name,  and  the  parents  accordingly  ask  him  to  give  one.  Such  names 
are  given  with  regard  to  the  personal  appearance,  to  birds  or  other 
animals,  to  tobacco  (e.  g.  Yuri-niro,  Yuri-tukoro  =  tobacco  flower), 
after  the  piai's  kickshaws,  etc.  (e.  g.  Shibari,  "stone,"  Kalliko-yang, 
"crystal,"  Wara-maraka,  a  name  derived  from  his  rattle),  or  "after 
some  quality  or  title."  With  the  Makusis  it  was  either  the  grand- 
mother or  grandfather,  who,  on  the  conclusion  of  the  couvade,  gave  the 
iaf  ant  one  of  the  names  customary  in  the  family  (ScE, ,  ii,  3 1 5) .  Among 
the  Tukanos  it  is  the  father,  under  similar  circumstances,  who  gives  the 
name,  generally  that  of  an  animal  (KG,  i,  3 1 3) .  So  also  on  the  Islands 
the  Caribs  do  not  bestow  names  immediately  after  birth,  but  wait  for 
twelve  or  fifteen  days  when  they  call  in  a  man  and  woman  who  take 
the  place  of  sponsors,  and  pierce  the  child's  under-lip  and  nostril. 
The  majority  of  the  names  which  the  Caribs  impose  on  their  children 
are  taken  from  their  ancestors  or  from  various  trees  which  grow  on 
the  islands,  or  from  something  that  has  happened  to  the  father 
at  the  time  of  his  wife's  pregnancy,  or  during  her  lying-in  (RoP, 
552-3).  A  convalescent  patient  may  start  life  afresh  with  a  new 
name  (Sect.  305). 

365.  The  circumstances  vary  under  which  the  name  already  given 
may  be  changed.  As  already  mentioned  (Sect.  26^),  this  was  the 
case  with  the  Arawaks  on  recovery  from  prolonged  sickness.  On  the 
Carib  Islands  the  names  given  to  the  male  children  shortly  after 
birth  were  not  retained  throughout  life;  they  changed  them  when 
old  enough  to  be  received  into  the  rank  of  warriors,  or  if  they  had 
borne  themselves  bravely  in  battle  and  had  killed  an  Arawak  chief, 
they  took  his  name  as  a  mark  of  honor  (RoP,  552-3).  Both  on  the 
Islands  and  on  the  Maialand  names  were  exchanged  in  testimony  of 
great  aflfection  and  inviolable  friendship  (RoP,  513):  "When  they 
want  to  make  friends,  they  ask  for  our  names  and  give  us  theirs.  To 
show  affection  and  friendship  they  want  us  to  exchange  names" 
(BBR,  237-8).  In  Porto  Rico  "Juan  Ponce  de  Leon,  in  fact,  was 
received  into  the  bosom  of  the  family,  and  the  Cacique  exchanged 
names  with  him,  which  is  the  Indian  pledge  of  perpetual  amity" 


BOTH]  BESTBICTIOXS  307 

(WI,  778).  With  the  present-day  Arawaks  and  Warraus,  among 
members  of  the  same  sex  it  is  of  common  occurrence  as  proof  of 
friendship  and  affection  not  to  exchange  names,  but  for  the  younger 
to  adopt  the  name  of  the  older  one  (Sect.  120).  The  Island  Caribs 
have  also  in  their  drinking  bouts  or  on  occasions  of  pubUc  rejoicing, 
some  one  appointed  to  give  them  a  new  name,  whom  they  address 
after  having  drunk  well.  "I  wish  to  be  named.  Name  me!"  one 
will  say,  whereupon  the  other  immediately  satisfies  him  and  is 
rewarded  with  a  present — a  quartz-crystal,  or  other  article  (RoP, 
552-3). 

366.  With  a  view  to  their  becoming  good  huntiog  dogs,  the  War- 
raus name  their  canine  friends  after  those  animals  which  are  known 
to  hunt  well,  as  certain  ants  and  bees  which  catch  plenty  of  other 
prey;  after  warribisi  (Sect.  88),  a  big  wasp  that  lays  its  ^gs  in  the 
ground  and  brings  various  worms  from  the  bush  for  its  young,  when 
hatched,  to  feed  on;  after  sakaro  and  buruma,  two  crabs  which  run 
quickly  and  hunt  well;  after  the  giant  anteater,  the  shark,  and  the 
small  wild  dog  (karisiri),  all  of  these  possessing  undoubtedly  good 
hunting  qualities. 

366A.  Special  words,  or  paraphrases,  have  to  be  used  under  par- 
ticular circumstances;  thus,  in  traveling  over  water — river  or  sea — 
the  use  of  certain  names  otherwise  employed  in  ordinary  every-day 
conversation,  is  absolutely  forbidden  (Sect.  19^).  On  the  Aiary  River 
(Rio  Negro)  the  villages  have  secret  names  which  are  not  mentioned 
except  under  pressure  (KG,  i,  184).  There  are  some  few  words  which 
may  be  employed  only  according  to  the  sex  speaking,  or  spoken  to. 
Thus,  among  the  Arawaks,  to  express  the  word ' '  surely  "  or  "  certainly  " 
a  man  will  say  tashi  to  a  woman,  but  tade  to  a  man,  whereas  a  woman 
will  use  the  term  tara  when  conversing  with  one  of  her  own  sex,  but 
tasM  when  talking  to  one  of  the  opposite.  "Oh,  yes ! "  "So  you  say," 
is  similarly  expressed  by  three  words:  labui  between  woman  and 
woman,  or  woman  and  man,  but  dadai  when  a  man  addresses  a 
woman,  and  daido  when  he  is  talking  to  another  man.  The  signifi- 
cation of  this  distinction  I  have  not  been  able  to  discover;  it  is  not 
connected,  of  course,  with  the  use  of  different  languages  by  the 
opposite  sexes,  as  was  the  case  in  the  Lesser  Antilles  with  the  Carib 
warriors  and  their  Arawak  wives.  And,  finally,  with  the  mainland 
Arawaks  a  particular  plaintive  intonation  is  used  in  inquiries  after  the 
health  or  welfare  of  those  who  are  iU  or  unfortunate ;  and  the  tone  is 
always  suited  to  the  circumstances  and  situation  of  the  party  ad- 
dressed (HiC,  248). 


Chapter  XVI 
SEXUAL  LIFE ' 

Puberty  Ordeals  (267):  fasting  (268);  exposure  to  ant  bites  (£69);  scarification 
(£70);  flogging  (£71);  other  inconveniencea  in  connection  with  isolation,  water, 
fire,  cooking,  and  the  hair  (27:?) ;  conclusion  of  ceremony  (£73).  Similar  ordeals  at 
subsequent  menstruations  (£74)- 

Courtship:  Tokens  of  accepted  proposals  (£7S). 

Marriage  Ordeals:  Similar  to  those  at  puberty  (£76),  but  additional  trials  of  skill, 
etc.,  for  males  (£77-£78).    Family  Restrictions  on  Marriage  (£78A). 

Childbirth  Ordeals:  Pre-natal,  for  one  or  both  parents  (£79);  Post-natal — fasting, 
scarification,  flogging  (£80),  isolation  and  couvade  (£81);  Male  as  parturient  parent 
(£81  A);  Miscellaneous  restrictions  (£82,  £8S);  Destruction  of  new-bom  child,  Twins 
(£84).    Asexual  genesis  of  children  (£84A).    Birth  marks  (£84B). 

367.  In  many  of  the  tribes,  as  the  Warraus  and  the  Caribs,  the 
young  people  of  both  sexes  can  not  enter  into  permanent  sexual 
partnership  until  they  have  successfuJly  undergone  the  puberty 
ordeals  (Cr,  612);  in  others,  the  betrothal  or  perhaps  even  the  con- 
STunmation  of  the  marriage  follows  as  a  direct  consequence  of  such 
ordeals.  The  residt  has  been  that  some  authors  have  referred  certain 
marriage  customs  to  puberty  ceremonies,  while  occasionally  the 
reverse  has  happened.  As  a  matter  of  fact  they  would  seem  to  be 
more  or  less  identical.  The  puberty  ordeals  include  (a)  more  or  less 
rigid  fasting,  combined  with  (&)  exposure  to  the  bites  of  ants, 
etc.,  (c)  severe  scarification,  or  (d)  soimd  flogging — all  to  be  borne 
without  visible  signs  of  suffering.  A  careful  study  of  these' leads  one 
to  the  conviction  that  with  both  sexes  the  effect  is  to  ensure  the 
young  people  being  healthy  and  strong,  wUhng  to  work,  skilful,  and 
industrious.  In  the  case  of  the  female,  the  general  tenor  of  the 
facts  points  to  a  belief  in  her  being  possessed  by  some  Spirit  prone  to 
evil,  whose  influence  so  far  as  practicable,  has  to  be  counteracted  and 
destroyed.  Hence  the  piai  blows  on  (Sect.  8S)  and  mutters  over  the 
[Makusi]  girl  and  her  more  valuable  belongings  so  as  to  disenchant 
her  and  everything  she  has  come  into  contact  with  (ScE,  ii,  316). 
Some  of  the  ordeals  may  be  repeated,  though  in  a  less  degree,  at  the 
second,  perhaps  at  the  third  menstrual  period. 

368.  To  account  for  this  enforced  abstinence  from  sufficient  food 
on  the  part  of  the  women  at  tunes  of  menstruation,  a  cacique  on  the 
Orinoco  told  Gumilla:  "Our  ancestors  observed  that  wherever  the 
women,   during  their  monthly  periods,  happened  to  tread,   there 

1  For  the  various  charms  connected  with  sexual  matters,  love  and  affection,  see  Sects.  IIS7-XS8 
308 


BOTH]  SEXUAL   LIFE  309 

everything  dried  up,  and  that  if  any  man  trod  where  they  had  placed 
their  feet,  his  legs  would  sweU:  having  studied  the  remedy,  they 
ordered  us  to  starve  them,  so  that  their  bodies  should  be  free  from 
the  poison"  (G,  i,  159).  So  with  the  Pomeroon  Caribs,  it  was 
essential  that  when  the  girl  was  carried  from  her  hammock  to  the 
place  where  the  scarification  had  been  effected,  and  back  again,  her 
feet  must  not  touch  the  ground  (ScR,  n,  431).  Anaong  the 
Pomeroon  Arawaks,  at  the  puberty  ceremony  of  first  menstru- 
ation the  girl  is  allowed  no  meat,  but  a  httle  fish  (and  these 
must  be  only  of  smaU  size),  together- with  small  cassava  cakes,  of 
which  she  must  eat  only  the  center,  and  a  modicum  of  water  ia  a 
very  small  calabash.  For  the  next  six  months  or  so,  according  to 
circumstances,  the  yoimg  woman  does  not  eat  any  meat  of  large 
animals,  or  fish  which  has  much  blood  in  it,  as  flesh  of  the  tapir, 
yarau,  turtle,  etc.  With  the  Warraus  the  girl  must  not  speak  or 
laugh  or  eat  during  the  two  or  three  days  of  the  period.  Were  she 
to  do  so,  she  would  lose  all  her  teeth  when  she  grew  into  a  big  woman. 
The  first  thing  she  is  allowed  to  eat  is  a  Uttle  cassava  flour  wrapped 
in  a  leaf.  The  Pomeroon  Carib  girl  who,  for  the  space  of  three  days 
had  to  do  without  food  or  water,  was  not  allowed  to  utter  a  word. 
She  was  subsequently  starved  for  a  month  on  a  diet  of  roots,  cassava 
bread,  and  water  (ScR,  n,  431).  Girls  may  die  trader  this  treatment. 
369.  In  order  that  the  Arawak  girl,  now  become  a  woman,  may 
henceforth  have  strength  and  willingness  to  work,  some  old  stranger 
whose  character  is  known  to  be  strong  and  good,  and  a  willing 
worker,  is  chosen  to  place  an  ant-frame  on  the  young  woman's  fore- 
head, hands,  and  feet.  The  ants  are  attached  at  their  middles 
in  the  interstices  of  the  plaited  strands  forming  the  framework,  the 
frame  itself  being  appUed  on  the  side  from  which  all  the  little 
heads  are  projecting.  In  Cayenne,  Pitou  (ii,  267)  describes  the 
ant-frame  as  being  apphed  by  the  girl's  mother.  Among  the 
Warraus,  as  with  the  Caribs,  the  young  people  of  both  sexes  cannot 
marry  untU  they  have  gone  through  the  ordeal  of  the  ants. 
Among  the  Warraus  [mouth  of  Orinoco],  the  sufferer  is  put  in 
Ms  hammock;  they  apply  the  tari-tari  ants  to  him;  if  he  cries 
out  he  is  condemned  to  celibacy  (Cr,  612).  My  Warrau  friends  on 
the  Moruca  recognize  the  above-mentioned  insects  as  their  natatari. 
They  tell  me  that  long  ago  the  same  practices  were  carried  on  here. 
If  the  girl  cried  it  meant  .that  she  could  not  work,  and  was  therefore 
not  deserving  of  a  husband.  The  Roucouyenne  (Cayenne  Carib) 
would-be  bridegroom  has  to  submit  to  a  corresponding  ordeal  at  the 
hands  of  the  piai:  the  latter  appUes  ants  to  the  chest  and  wasps  on 
the  forehead,  the  whole  of  the  body  being  subsequently  stung  with 
ants  and  wasps  (Cr,  245-50).  According  to  Coudreau,  the  Ojanas 
believe  that  the  wasp  ordeal  undergone  by  the  men  renders  them 


310  ANIMISM   AND   FOLK-LOKE   OP   GUIANA  INDIANS   [eth.  ANN.  30 

skilful,  clever,  and  industrious;  and  certainly  the  obligation  of  pub- 
licly braving  severe  bodily  suffering  has  an  assured  intrinsic  value 
(Go,  21).  If  the  parents  had  not  previously  submitted  themselves 
to  these  ant  and  wasp  tests  and  other  ordeals  the  Cayenne  Apalais 
and  Roucouyennes  believe  that  "only  emaciated  and  sickly  children 
-would  be  born  to  them"  (Cr,  307).  It  is  noteworthy  that  in  both 
Surinam  and  Cayenne  the  insects  above  referred  to  "are  held  in. 
frames  of  bizarre  shapes  fringed  with  feathers,  representing  quad- 
rupeds and  birds  (Cr,  245-50).  In  such  cases  it  certainly  seems  a 
very  fair  question  to  inquire  whether  it  is  the  properties  and  qualities 
of  the  particular  quadruped  or  bird  represented  in  the  shape  of  the 
frame,  or  those  of  the  old  stranger,  piai,  or  other  individual  applying 
it,  that  are  supposed  to  be  impressed  on  the  young  person's  character; 
unfortunately  the  evidence  thus  far  collected  is  insufficient  to  furnish  a 
satisfactory  answer.  But  in  the  following  example  the  object  of 
applying  the  ants  at  all  woxdd  seem  to  be — though  the  suggestion 
after  all  may  be  wrong — to  obtain  the  personal  characteristics  and 
qualities  of  the  European  traveler :  ' '  On  entering  the  Apalai  village — a 
custom  we  did  not  find  among  the  Ouayanas — they  brought  me 
a  framework  of  palm  leaves  to  which  were  attached  at  their  centers, 
some  big  black  ants.  All  the  people  of  the  tribe,  irrespective  of  age 
or  sex,  presented  themselves  for  me  to  apply  it  to  their  bodies,  loins, 
thighs,  etc."  (Cr,  300). 

370.  The  Warrau  boys  had  to  undergo  at  initiation  greater  ordeals 
than  the  girls,  to  demonstrate  their  strength  and  manly  prowess. 
These  ordeals  consisted  principally  in  the  infliction  of  painful  wounds 
upon  the  breast  and  arms  with  the  tusk  of  the  wild  boar  or  the  beak 
of  the  toucan.  If  the  boy  endures  all  this  without  showing  signs  of 
pain,  he  can  rank  thenceforth  with  the  men;  if  not,  he  has  to  submit 
to  the  ordeal  on  another  occasion  (ScR,  i,  168).  The  Carib  girl  of  the 
Pomeroon  is  operated  on  by  the  piai,  who  with  the  incisors  of  the 
Dasyprocta  [acouri]  makes  deep  incisions  down  her  back,  and  from 
shoulder  to  shoulder;  he  then  rubs  pepper  into  these  wounds,  without 
the  poor  tortured  creature  daring  to  utter  one  cry  of  pain  (ScR,  ii, 
431).  So  also  in  Cayenne,  a  number  of  bloody  incisions  are  made  in 
her  body,  and  it  is  only  subsequent  to  this  that  she  is  allowed  to 
wear  the  apron-belt  (kewe-yo) :  the  young  man  is  allowed  to  wear  the 
lap-cloth  only  after  having  passed  the  necessary  ordeals  (PBa,  225). 
In  Cayenne  again,  the  girl  is  said  to  have  her  teeth  filed  down  by  the 
piai  at  her  puberty  initiation  (LAP,  ii,  267). 

3n.  On  returning  from  her  first  bath  [after  the  first  menstrual 
period]  the  Makusi  girl  must  during  the  night  sit  upon  a  stool  or 
stone,  to  be  whipped  by  her  mother  with  thin  rods  without  raising 
the  sUghtest  cry  to  wake  the  sleeping  occupants  of  the  hut,  an  occur- 
rence which  would  prove  dangerous  for  her  future  welfare.     The 


BOTH]  SEXUAL  LIFE  311 

whipping  takes  place  also  at  the  second  menstrual  period,  but  not 
subsequently  (ScR,  ii,  316).  Among  the  Puinavis  Indians  of  the 
Ynirida  [upper  Oriaoco],  the  "Devil"  who  three  days  before  has 
been  making  terrible  music  in  the  forest  at  last  enters  the  house  of 
the  poor  young  girl,  who  tries  to  take  to  flight.  A  piai  at  this  moment 
runs  up  and,  binding  her  eyes  (Sect.  255),  leads  her  through  the 
village  while  the  Devil  all  by  himseK  is  making  a  frightful  hubbub. 
Now  is  the  time  for  the  festival  of  the  beating  with  the  sticks,  when 
the  men  strike  the  unfortunate  girl,  who  dares  not  complain.  At  last 
a  young  man,  admiring  her  courage,  takes  her  place,  and  exposes 
himself  to  the  blows  of  the  company;  if  he  bears  the  pain  without 
murmuring  she  chooses  him  for  her  husband  (Or,  532).  [Compare 
Sect.  276. \  With  the  Uaupes  River  Indians,  "all  relatives  and 
friends  of  the  parents  are  assembled,  bringing,  each  of  them,  pieces 
of  sip6  (an  elastic  chmber);  the  girl  is  then  brought  out,  perfectly 
naked,  into  the  midst  of  them,  when  each  person  present  gives  her 
five  or  six  severe  blows  with  the  sip6  across  the  back  and  breast  till 
she  falls  senseless,  and  it  sometimes  happens,  dead.  If  she  recovers 
it  is  repeated  four  times  at  intervals  of  six  hours,  and  it  is  considered 
an  offence  to  the  parents  not  to  strike  hard.  During  this  time  numer- 
ous pots  of  all  kinds  of  meat  and  fish  have  been  prepared,  when  the 
sip6s  are  dipped  in  them  and  given  to  her  to  lick '  and  she  is  then  con- 
sidered a  woman  and  allowed  to  eat  anything,  and  is  marriageable. 
The  boys  undergo  a  somewhat  similar  ordeal  [at  puberty,  as  the  girls] 
but  not  so  severe,  which  initiates  them  into  manhood,  and  allows  them 
to  see  the  Jurupari  music"  (ARW,  345). 

373.  What  may  be  regarded  as  remaining  puberty  ordeals  to  which 
the  young  girl  has  to  submit  at  her  first  menstruation,  and  to  a  minor 
degree  at  all  her  subsequent  ones,  are  certain  procedures  connected 
with  her  isolation,  with  water,  fire,  cooking,  and  cooking  apparatus, 
and  with  the  hair.  In  the  "old  days "  of  the  Pomeroon  Arawaks,  the 
girl  would  remain  with  her  mother  in  a  separate  logie,  or  in  a  spe- 
cially constructed  compartment  of  the  house.  The  former  would  be 
distinguished  by  hanging  from  the  posts  waste  shreds  of  the  ite  (Mau- 
ritia)  palm,  that  is,  the  leaves  from  which  the  outer  fibrous  layer,  for 
making  twine,  has  already  been  removed.  The  specially  constructed 
room  was  called  the  aibona-lehi.  The  Warraus  are  said  to  have  used  a 
separate  closed  house.  With  the  Makusis,  at  the  first  signs,  the  girl 
is  separated  from  all  intercourse  with  the  occupants  of  the  hut ;  her 
hammock  is  taken  from  Its  usual  place  and  slung  in  the  highest  part  of 
the  hut,  where  the  poor  creature  is  exposed  to  all  the  smoke  which,  if 
that  be  possible,  is  now  increased.  For  the  first  few  days  she  must  not 
leave  her  hammock  at  all  during  the  daytime.     When  the  most  active 

>  Compare  the  licking  of  the  stjck  by  the  Kanaima  devotee  to  obtain  purification  (Sect.  St9). 


312  ANIMISM   AND  FOLK-LOKE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS    [bth.  ANN.  30 

and  striking  of  the  symptoms  have  passed  she  can  come  down  from  her 
height,  and  occupy  a  small  place  partitioned  off  in  the  darkest  comer 
of  the  hut  (ScE,  ii,  315).  So  also  in  Cayenne,  the  girl's  hammock 
was  slung  high  up  to  the  ridge  of  the  Tcarhet  (PBa,  225).  On  the 
upper  Amazon,  she  is  similarly  banished  to  the  girao  [an  overhead 
staging  inside  the  oblong  hut]  under  the  smoky  and  filthy  roof  (HWB, 
383).  She  must  not  go  near  water  until  when  the  period  is  past;  her 
mother  bathes  her  in  the  closed  room.  If,  during  the  day,  the  Arawak 
girl  wishes  to  micturate  she  must  do  so  into  a  goblet,  which  she  empties 
after  dark  in  the  bush.  When  she  thus  similarly  goes  to  ease  herself, 
she  must  be  accompanied  by  her  mother,  and  must  take  with  her  a 
lighted  fire-stick,  which  otherwise  would  not  be  used.  The  Makusi  girl 
uses  a  fire  which  she  herself  has  to  light,  and  alone  gets  the  benefit  of. 
For  ten  days  she  cooks  her  cassava  meal  in  her  own  pot  at  her  own 
fire.  Pots  and  drinking  vessels  that  she  has  used  are  broken,  and  the 
chips  buried  (ScR,  ii,  316).  The  Arawak  girl  must  not  comb  her  hair, 
but  must  let  it  hang  loose  until  such  time  as  her  mother  combs  it 
after  bathing  her  when  the  event  is  over.  The  Warrau  matron  (or 
the  father  sometimes)  crops  her  (or  his)  daughter's  hair;  the  Carib  girl 
has  hers  burned  off  (ScE,  ii,  431).  On  the  Aiary  Eiver  (Rio  Negro), 
the  hair  cut  from  a  girl  at  menstruation  is  used  for  head  and  dance 
ornaments  by  the  men  (KG,  i,  181;  ii,  253). 

373.  As  a  rule  the  puberty  ordeal  is  brought  to  a  conclusion  with  a 
drink-and-dance  party,  in  which  the  girl  herself  neither  drinks  nor 
dances,  though  she  constitutes  of  course  the  central  object  of  attrac- 
tion. If  an  Arawak,  she  is  brought  out  of  the  closed  room  by  a 
middle-aged  man,  and  shown  in  her  decorations  to  the  assembled 
guests;  she  then  takes  her  seat  on  a  stool  especially  made  for  her, 
shaped  Uke  a  crocodile  or  a  "tiger."  Previous  to  these  festivities 
her  brother  or  father  has  killed  a  hunmiingbird,  dried  it,  and  cut  it 
up  into  very  small  pieces.  Every  visitor,  male  or  female,  now  gets  a 
bit  of  this  on  a  small  piece  of  cassava,  the  idea  being  that  when  the 
girl  grows  older  she  will  obtain  her  share  of  any  of  the  good  things 
that  the  other  people  may  possess.  The  Warrau  young  woman  is 
decked  with  beads  and  the  white  feather-down  of  various  birds,  as 
Crax  and  Ardea,  apparently  stuck  with  some  gummy  substance  to  the 
smooth  head  [the  hair  having  been  cut],  and  the  arms  and  legs  (ScR,  i, 
168).  The  Caribs  paint  her  red  all  over.  In  place  of  the  stool  they 
would  seem  to  have  employed  a  stone  or  ( ?)  plate  (ScR,  ii,  431). 

374.  The  following  are  the  ordeals  regularly  undergone  by  Arawak 
women  at  subsequent  menstruations,  and  which  I  understand  are 
undergone,  to  a  greater  or  less  extent,  by  women  of  other  tribes 
also,  for  example,  the  Warraus.  The  girl  takes  up  her  quarters  in  a 
separate  logie  or  banab,  distinguishable  from  all  other  structures  by  the 
suspended  bunches  of  waste  ite  shreds.     She  lies  in  a  smaller  ham- 


BOTH]  SEXUAL   LIFE  313 

mock  than  usual.  She  must  not  eat  meat  from  any  big  animal 
(as  tapir  and  turtle),  or  fish  which  contains  much  blood.  The  flesh 
of  any  game  himted  by  dogs  is  strictly  forbidden  her;  otherwise  the 
dogs  would  be  permanently  spoiled  for  hunting.  On  no  account 
may  she  cook,  bake,  or  prepare  drink,  for  other  men  or  women. 
She  must  not  cross  water,  travel  in  a  corial,  or  bathe  in  a  river  or  a 
pond;  if  she  wishes  to  wash  she  may  pour  water  out  of  a  calabash 
over  herself.  Using  a  separate  fire  for  herself,  it  is  imperative  that 
she  never  blows  one  out.  She  has  to  cook  in  a  smaller  pot,  and 
employ  a  smaller  fan,  goblet,  etc.,  all  especially  made  for  the  purpose. 
In  this  connection  I  would  suggest  that  many  of  the  "toy  vessels," 
described  by  im  Thum  as  being  "seen  in  and  about  almost  every 
Indian  house"  (IT,  278),  are  in  reality  the  pottery-ware  used  specially 
during  the  periods  of  menstruation.  Finally,  the  girl  must  not  comb 
her  hair  but  must  let  it  hang  loose. 

In  addition  to  the  bathing  prohibition,  the  Makusi  women  dining 
these  times  must  not  go  into  the  forest,  where  they  would  be  exposed 
to  the  embraces  of  snakes  (ScK,  ii,  316).  On  the  lower  Guaviar  the 
Piapoco  husband  is  said  to  bring  the  wife  her  food  during  the  few 
days  that  she  remains  isolated  in  the  special  hut  (Cr,  526). 

375.  In  matters  of  courtship  the  would-be  benedict  knows  that 
the  acceptance  of  an  offering  of  food  or  of  other  objects  ia  the  token 
of  a  favorable,  the  rejection,  that  of  an  unfavorable  issue.  The 
Arawak  lover,  after  making  siu-e  beforehand  through  the  girl's  rela- 
tives that  he  will  not  meet  with  a  refusal,  pays  a  visit  to  her  parents, 
tells  them  how  poor  he  is,  that  he  has  no  wife,  etc.  At  the  conclusion 
of  these  preUminaries  the  young  woman  puts  before  him  something 
to  eat  (SR,  ii,  459).  He  knows  that  the  path  of  true  love  is  going  to 
run  smooth.  So  again  in  the  same  tribe  if  a  father  wants  some 
well-known  person  for  son-in-law,  he  lets  his  daughter  place  food 
before  the  latter  during  the  course  of  a  visit;  if  he  partakes  of  it,  the 
union  is  assured;  if  not,  the  old  man  knows  that  their  wishes  do  not 
agree  (ScR,  ii,  459).  At  the  present  day,  on  the  Pomeroon,  when 
the  Arawak  young  man  returns  on  the  appointed  day  to  receive  an 
answer  from  the  father,  he  takes  care  to  leave  his  hammock  at  the 
waterside,  or  on  the  pathway.  If  the  girl  brings  this  in,  he  knows 
that  his  prospects  are  favorable,  any  doiibt  being  clinched  by  the 
father  telling  his  daughter  to  give  the  young  man  cassava,  pepper-pot, 
beltiri,  or  anything  else  that  may  be  on  hand.  In  Surinam,. it  is 
sufficient  for  the  man  anxious  to  marry,  to  take  to  the  girl  all  the 
game  and  fish  that  he  has  caught  diu-ing  the  day;  if  she  accepts  this 
present  it  is  a  sign  that  she  is  willing  to  have  him  (Fe,  38).  In 
Cayenne,  with  the  GaUbis,  as  soon  as  a  girl  has  taken  a  fancy  to  an 
Indian  she  will  offer  him  drink,  together  with  firewood  to  hght  near 


314  ANIMISM   AND   FOLK-LOEE   OP   GUIANA  INDIANS    [bth.  ann.  30 

his  hammock;  if  he  refuses  the  offer  it  means  that  he  does  not  want 
her  (PBa,  220). 

376.  In  none  of  the  tribes  is  any  sexual  union  publicly  recognized 
as  permanent — the  closest  correspondence  I  can  find  to  our  idea  of 
marriage — prior  to  the  advent  of  womanhood.  Certain  of  the  ordeals 
of  puberty  are  closely  paralleled:  indeed,  as  at  puberty,  the  candi- 
dates for  matrimony  have  to  submit  to  a  rigid  fast  with  or  without 
exposure  to  ants,  wasps,  etc.,  a  sound  flogging  (KG,  ii,  144),  or  a 
severe  scarification.  It  is  only  the  males  on  whom  something  addi- 
tional is  imposed  in  the  way  of  trials  of  skill  and  the  like.  Among 
the  Makusis  the  man,  for  some  time  before  marriage,  abstains  from 
meat  (IT,  221-3),  which  was  apparently  the  case  with  the  Guayquirie 
and  Mapoye  females  of  the  Orinoco.  Concerning  the  latter  tribes 
Gumilla  says:  For  forty  days  before  marrying,  their  girls  are  locked 
up  to  a  continuous  and  rigid  fast:  three  seeds  of  the  Murichi,  three 
ounces  of  cassava  with  a  pitcher  of  water  is  their  daily  ration;  and 
so,  on  the  day  of  the  nuptials,  they  are  more  Hke  corpses  than  brides 
(G,  1,  159).  No  reasons  for  this  abstention  are  given,  though  it  was 
asserted  for  the  Carib  girls  on  the  Islands,  who  were  treated  simi- 
larly, that  the  id«a  of  the  fasting  was  to  prevent  them  becoming  slug- 
gards, not  likely  to  work  when  married  (BBR,  250).  The  young 
Apalai  males  on  the  Parou  River,  Cayenne,  have  to  undergo  the  mardke 
(the  ant  and  wasp  ordeal)  prior  to  attempting  the  trials  of  skill. 
Among  the  Guahibos  of  the  Vichada  River  (Orinoc'o)  on  the  occa- 
sion of  the  marriage  of  a  widow,  after  having  covered  her  husband's 
remains  with  earth,  they  put  her  on  the  grave,  and  remove  the  rag 
which,  for  the  time  being  covers  her  chest :  she  then  holds  her  hands 
above  her  head :  a  man  comes  forward  and  strikes  her  breasts  with  a 
switch — ^^this  is  her  future  husband:  the  other  men  hit  her  on  the 
shoulders,  and  she  receives  the  flagellation  without  a  groan:  her 
fianc6  in  his  turn  is  struck  with  the  switch,  his  hands  joined  above  his 
head  and  without  a  murmur  (Cr,  548).  [Compare  Sect.  ;?7i.]  After 
the  above  ceremony,  they  place  another  woman  on  the  grave  and 
pierce  the  extremity  of  her  tongue  with  a  bone :  the  blood  runs  down 
her  chest,  and  a  sorcerer  besmears  her  breasts  with  it  (Cr,  548). 

a??.  In  most  of  the  tribes  there  were  certain  trials  of  skill  (Sect.  30), 
certain  marriage  ordeals,  which  the  would-be  suitor  had  successfully 
to  surmount  before  gaining  permanent  possession  of  his  wife,  in 
addition  to  the  puberty  ordeals  that  had  previously  to  be  passed. 
These  marriage  ordeals  at  the  same  time  may  be  admittedly  regarded 
as  omens  or  tokens  of  what  the  father-in-law  or  his  daughter 
might  reasonably  expect  from  the  husband  in  the  future.  The 
Uacarras  Indians,  a  tribe  on  the  River  Apaporis,  a  branch  of  the 
Uaupes,  of  the  Rio  Negro,  have  a  trial  of  skill  at  shooting  with 
the  bow  and  arrow,  and  if  the  young  man  does  not  show  himself  a 


BOTH]  SEXUAL   LIFE  315 

good  marksman,  the  girl  refuses  him  on  the  ground  that  he  wiQ  not 
be  able  to  shoot  fish  and  game  enough  for  the  family  (ARTT,  346). 
On  the  Ormoco,  he  had  to  kill  a  bush-hog  all  by  himself  and  bring  it 
to  his  future  father-in-law's  house  to  show  that  he  was  indeed  a  man 
(G,  ir,  285) .  The  young  Apalai  Indians  on  the  Parou  River,  Cayenne, 
after  submitting  to  the  mardke  (ant  and  wasp  ordeal)  must  now  "go 
through  the  target  test:  with  their  backs  turned,  they  have  to  throw 
cassava  pellets  (ioulettes)  at  a  piece  of  wood  upon  which  a  circle  has 
been  traced,  and  must  hit  it  three  times  nmning,  etc."  (Cr,  307).  In 
its  most  complete  form,  however,  the  shooting  ordeal  seems  to  have 
been  carried  out  by  the  Arawaks,  and  it  is  from  the  very  old  people 
of  this  people  that  I  have  been  able  to  gather  the  following  facts 
concerning  what  used  to  take  place  in  bygone  days.  When  the  youth 
went  to  his  future  father-in-law  and  asked  for  the  girl,  the  old  man 
would  consult  his  wife  and  daughter,  as  a  rule,  and  if  everything 
were  satisfactory  would  say  "yes,"  but  would  not  give  him  actual 
possession  of  her  until  he  had  performed  certain  deeds,  the  first  and 
foremost  of  which  was  to  shoot  into  a  certain  woodpecker's  nest. 
He  would  accordingly  ask  the  suitor  whether  he  were  ready  or 
whether  he  wished  to  wait  a  few  days.  The  latter  would  of  course 
say  he  was  quite  ready,  so  impetuous  is  youth,  and  would  give  a 
minute  description  of  the  situation  of  the  particular  tree,  usually 
one  close  to  the  water-side,  into  which  he  proposed  shooting  the 
arrow.  The  girl's  father,  however,  would  invariably  plead  some 
excuse  to  put  him  off,  say  to  the  next  day,  and  in  the  meantime  would 
get  ready  a  big  corial — big  enough  to  carry  10  or  12  men — and  engage 
his  crew.  When  next  morning  the  yoimg  man  turned  up  again,  the 
old  man  had  everything  ready  and  would  get  them  all  into  the  boat, 
he  himself  steering.  The  girl  herself  had  to  sit  on  the  left  of  her 
would-be  husband  in  the  bows.  When  within  a  comparatively  short 
distance  from  the  tree  wherein  the  woodpecker's  nest  lay  concealed, 
the  old  man  would  call  upon  the  crew  to  pull  with  all  their  strength — 
and  the  young  man  to  draw  his  bow.  Before,  however,  the  arrow 
had  sped,  and  while  yet  the  bow  was  fully  stretched,  the  woman  had 
to  touch  his  left  side  with  her  hand  signifying  that  if  his  arrow  reached 
its  mark  she  agreed  to  be  his.  If  he  missed,  the  performance  had  to 
be  postponed  to  another  occasion,  he  having  the  right  to  try  as  many 
times  as  he  liked  until  he  succeeded  and  in  the  meantime  he  might 
continue  practising  on  his  own  accoimt.  Luck  might  assist  him  on 
the  first  occasion,  sometimes  on  the  second,  third,  or  fourth,  or  he 
might  have  to  make  the  trial  so  many  times  that  he  would  give  up  the 
attempt  as  well  as  all  thoughts  for  the  girl,  and  proceed  to  some  other 
settlement  where  the  woodpecker's  nests  were  situated  to  better 
advantage.  Without  shooting  his  arrow  into  the  nest  the  wooer  would 
certainly  never  get  possession  of  the  girl — neither  father  nor  mother 


316  ANIMISM  AND   FOLK-LOEE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS   [bth.  ann.  30 

would  give  way  on  that  particular  point.  On  the  other  hand,  suppos- 
ing his  aim  to  have  been  finally  successful,  the  girl  would  be  as  wife 
to  him,  and  he  would  take  up  residence  in  his  father-in-law's  house. 
The  next  thing  was  for  the  old  Arawak  paterfamilias  to  mark  out 
a  piece  of  ground,  which  within  so  many  days  the  young  man  to 
whom  he  presented  an  ax  for  the  purpose,  had  to  cut  and  clear  for  a 
provision  field.  The  time  specified  was  usually  short,  the  young  man 
having  to  work  with  might  and  main,  starting  early  and  returning 
late,  but  finally  completing  the  task.  A  similar  ordeal  was  exacted 
among  the  Makusis  and  other  tribes  (ScK,  ii,  316).  But  there  was 
still  something  else  for  the  Arawak  would-be  bridegroom  to  do.  For 
during  the  time  occupied  in  cutting  the  field,  the  old  man  had  busied 
himself  in  collecting  a  large  number  of  crab  quakes  (baskets),  and 
subsequently  he  would  accompany  the  lad  out  to  sea,  and  would 
himself  watch  to  see  that  within  the  one  day  the  youngster  really 
filled  all  the  baskets  through  his  own  exertions,  and  did  not  obtain 
the  assistance  of  friends.  This  completed,  the  youth  became  hence- 
forth one  of  the  legal  heirs  of  the  house.  Should,  however,  the  lad 
not  have  cut  the  field  nor  filled  the  requisite  number  of  quakes  within 
the  allotted  period  he  would  have  been  laughed  and  jeered  at  when 
attending  subsequent  paiwarris.  The  two  ordeals,  just  described, 
however,  were  never  so  essential  as  that  of  the  shooting  of  the  arrow 
into  the  woodpecker's  nest. 

378.  A  Warning  to  Wives  (A) 

You  must  remember  that  in  the  days  of  long  ago  we  Arawais  would  never  accept 
a  suitor  for  our  daughter  unless  he  gave  us  some  proof  that  he  was  skilful  in  the  chafe, 
and  able  to  support  a  wife.  Among  such  tests  were  those  of  shooting  into  a  wood- 
pecker's nest  from  off  the  bows  of  a  swiftly  paddled  corial,  the  filling  of  so  many 
baskets  with  crabs  during  the  course  of  a  single  tide,  and  the  clearing  of  a  field  within 
a  certain  specified  period.  The  first  of  these  was  a  severe  test,  it  is  true,  and  grad- 
ually fell  into  disuse,  though  the  others  were  long  retained.  It  was  just  about  the 
time  when  the  first-mentioned  ordeal  had  been  done  away  with,  that  a  young  man, 
courting  a  girl,  thought  he  would  have  no  difficulty  in  gaining  permanent  possession 
of  her,  now  that  all  he  had  to  do  for  his  father-in-law  was  to  catch  some  crabs  (Sect. 
S65)  and  cut  a  field.  So  when  he  went  and  asked  the  old  man  for  his  daughter  and 
obtained  his  consent,  he  had  no  compxmction  in  settling  down  at  his  new  quarters, 
for  with  us  a  husband  always  lives  with  his  bride  before  he  completes  the  tests:  on 
their  fulfilment,  however,  will  depend  his  fate — whether  he  retains  permanent  pos- 
session of  her.  Two  or  three  weeks  having  been  spent  on  the  honeymoon,  the  old 
man  talked  to  the  lad  about  going  to  sea,  after  the  usual  manner,  to  catch  crabs, 
and  advised  him  to  get  his  quakes  (baskets)  ready  for  a  certain  day.  The  youth 
went  into  the  bush  with  his  companions  to  cut  the  necessary  mukm  [the  Creole  term 
applied  to  the  material  used  in  weaving  baskets],  and,  on  his  return,  sat  down  to  pre- 
pare it  (that  is,  to  split  it  into  strands,  and  to  tie  them  into  bundles).  As  a  matter 
of  fact,  he  did  not  know  what  else  to  do  with  them!  And  when  his  comrades,  who 
were  already  weaving  baskets  for  themselves,  saw  that  he  had  stopped  operations, 
they  inquired  the  cause,  and  were  told  that  he  intended  making. his  when  he 


BOTH]  SEXUAL  LIFE  317 

got  out  to  sea.  (He  was  ashamed  to  expose  his  ignorance  of  their  manufacture.) 
"You  must  be  very  quick  at  it,"  they  said.  "Not  at  all!"  he  replied,  "there 
is  no  difficulty  whatever  in  the  matter.  Indeed,  I  bet  that  I  will  make  my  quakes 
and  catch  crabs  while  you  are  catching  yours,  and  that  I  will  even  then  beat  you." 
They  then  all  made  a  start:  in  the  corial  were  the  would-be  husband,  his  new 
wife,  the  old  father-in-law,  and  some  five  or  six  other  young  men.  When  they 
reached  the  sea,  they  anchored  their  boat  at  a  little  distance  from  the  shore,  all 
except  the  honeymoon  couple  getting  out,  each  with  a  basket,  to  hunt  for  crabs. 
After  they  had  gone,  the  young  man  told  his  bride  to  jump  out  also,  and  drive  aU 
the  little  "four-eye"  fish  [TetrophthalmiLS  sp.]  toward  the  boat.  And  while  he 
waa  there  squatting  on  the  bench,  with  the  mukru  strands  in  his  hands  trjdng  to 
make  his  basket,  the  fish  all  passed  by.'  As  might  have  been  expected,  he  realized 
that  he  was  making  no  progress,  so  he  made  the  woman  surround  the  shoal  a  second 
time,  and  drive  the  fish  back  again,  thus  allowing  him  to  have  another  look.  She 
thus  continued  driving  the  fish  backward  and  forward,  and  still  he  made  no  progress. 
She  finally  became  very  angry,  and  picking  up  one  of  the  quakes  out  of  the  corial, 
waded  on  to  shore:  he  called  out  to  her  to  come  back,  but  she  took  no  heed  of 
him.  Now  the  particular  quake  which  she  had  taken  belonged,  as  she  well  knew, 
to  one  of  the  other  men  who  had  accompanied  them  on  the  expedition  and  who  was 
an  old  lover  of  hers;  it  was  this  same  man  whom  she  proceeded  to  join  when  she 
reached  shore.  She  came  close  to  him,  and  saying  that  she  wanted  to  help  him,  lent 
her  assistance  in  the  usual  manner :  as  he  dragged  the  crabs  out  of  their  holes,  he  would 
every  now  and  then  jerk  one  near  her,  and  she  would  gather  it  up  into  her  basket. 
Her  husband  now  came  over  and  joined  them,  and  though  he  would  drag  out  a  crab, 
and  throw  it  toward  her,  she  took  not  the  slightest  notice.  Although  he  repeatedly 
shouted,  "Look  out!  It  is  escaping.  Put  it  into  your  basket, "  she  would  not  even 
recognize  him.  With  her  old  lover,  on  the  other  hand,  it  was  quite  different:  they 
soon  filled  their  quakes,  and  went  back  to  the  boat  for  two  more  baskets;  and  these 
were  soon  filled.  Back  to  the  boat  for  two  more,  and  so  on,  backward  and  forward, 
until  all  the  quakes  were  full.  When  the  husband  realized  that  the  others  had  gath- 
ered almost  all  the  crabs  that  they  could  possibly  carry  home  with  them,  he  became 
desperate,  and  taking  his  hammock,  wrapped  within  its  folds  as  many  of  the  crus- 
taceans as  he  could  gather.  It  was  now  time  for  them  to  start  on  their  return  journey, 
but  getting  into  the  boat  the  bride  squatted,  not  on  her  husband's  bench  as  was  the 
proper  thing  for  a  recently  married  young  woman  to  do,  but  on  that  of  her  old  lover. 
The  would-be  husband  said,  "Come  here:  you  are  sitting  in  the  wrong  place;"  but 
she  and  the  old  man  took  no  notice  of  the  remark,  and  simply  snubbed  him.  Ftir- 
thermore,  when  they  reached  home,  all  the  men  tiuiied  into  their  hammocks,  while 
the  wife  busied  herself  over  the  cooking.  This  did  not  take  very  long,  as  she  was 
only  roasting  the  crabs,  so  she  was  soon  able  to  announce,  "Father!  It  is  quite  ready 
now."  Getting  out  of  his  hammock,  the  old  man  called  the  young  men  up  one  after 
another,  giving  each  one  his  name,  and  then  called  SaichiJ  Now,  on  hearing  this 
term  of  endearment,  the  husband  thought  he  was  intended,  and  accordingly  replied, 
Wangj"  [i.  e.  Yes,  thanks,  etc.].  "Xo,  no!"  said  the  old  father,  "I  mean  the 
son-in-law  whom  I  brought  in  the  boat  back  with  me  today.  He  knows  how  to  make 
quakes.  You  don't."  Naturally,  the  erstwhile  husband  was  put  to  shame,  and  imme- 
diately wended  his  steps  over  to  his  mother's  place,  carrying  with  him  his  hammock 
and  the  few  crabs  it  contained.  His  mother  was  indeed  a  dear  old  soul,  and  after 
cooking  the  crabs,  and  giving  him  a  real  square  meal,  consoled  him  as  only  a  mother 

>  The  pattern  of  the  weft  of  these  crab-qiiakes  is  known  to  the  Arawaks  as  the  kassaroa,  or  "foar^ye 
flsh,"  from  the  manner  in  which  the  starting  strands  are  arranged,  like  so  many  "eyes."  The  idea 
intended  to  be  conveyed  here  is  that  as  the  man  in  question  did  not  really  know  how  to  make  these  baskets, 
he  was  amcious  to  get  a  full  view  of  the  flsh,  so  as  to  serve  him  for  a  model  which  he  could  copy. 


318  ANIMISM  AND   FOLK-LOKE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS    [eth.  ann.  30 

can,  advismg  him  at  the  same  time  that  he  must  wait  a  while,  and  be  patient,  because 
she  was  sure  the  girl  would  make  up  to  him  again.  A  few  days  later  she  took  her 
son  away  to  visit  am  old  friend  of  hers,  a  man  who  was  very  wise  in  his  way.  She 
told  this  man  all  her  son's  troubles,  and  begged  that  he  wovild  teach  him  not  only 
how  to  hunt,  but  also  how  to  make  quakes,  pegalls,  matapis,  sifters,  and  fans,  becaiise 
it  was  due  only  to  her  boy's  ignorance  of  these  matters  that  he  had  lost  his  wife.  The 
old  man  agreed,  for  friendship's  sake,  and  mother  and  son  remained  with  him  for  more 
than  a  year,  the  latter  finally  becoming  quite  as  proficient  in  all  the  manly  arts  as 
his  teacher.  The  result  of  all  this  instruction  was  that  when  the  two  of  them,  after 
leaving  the  old  man's  place,  returned  to  their  own  little  house,  they  never  experienced 
those  pangs  of  hunger  that  they  did  in  the  old  times.  Each  day  her  son  brought  home 
something,  and  the  babracote  was  almost  groaning  under  the  load  of  dried  meat  that  it 
now  carried.  It  happened  that  a  woman  passing  that  way  called  in  one  afternoon, 
noticed  all  the  smoked  game,  and  accepted  a  choice  piece  which  the  old  woman  offered 
her  when  she  was  leaving.  Of  course,  woman-like,  she  must  needs  straightway  go 
and  show  this  very  piece  of  meat  to  all  the  inmates  of  the  house  where  the  faithless 
wife  of  a  year  ago  was  residing,  telling  her  and  all  her  people  that  her  late  husband 
was  not  such  a  fool  as  they  had  thought:  did  she  not  with  her  own  eyes  see  all  the 
game  that  he  had  killed,  and  all  the  quakes  and  matapjs  that  he  had  made?  Of 
course,  conversation  of  this  nature,  and  lota  more  of  it,  only  made  the  late  wife  moiB 
and  more  anxious  to  visit  the  spouse  whom  she  and  her  father  had  spumed.  And 
there  was  good  reason  for  it  too.  The  past  year's  experience  had  been  a  sad  one  for 
her:  she  had  discovered  too  late  that  her  second  husband  was  not  only  worthless,  but 
in  addition  lazy,  and  that  all  he  was  now  bent  on  doing  was  to  lie  in  his  hammock 
all  day,  and  make  her  work  for  him.  So  next  morning,  she  and  her  mother,  telling 
their  people  that  they  were  going  for  a  walk,  set  out  in  the  direction  that  led  to  the 
house  where  lived  the  master  of  whose  prowess  and  skill  they  had  heard  so  much  about 
the  day  before.  They  arrived  there.  The  man  was  lying  in  his  hammock,  but  his 
mother  received  them,  placed  stools,  asked  them  to  be  seated,  and  put  cassava  with 
peppers  before  them.  She  also  took  pains  to  apologize  that  there  was  nothing  else 
to  offer  them,  notwithstanding  that  the  babracote  with  its  load  of  meat  was,  as' it 
were,  staring  at  them.  The  visitors  gave  a  significant  look  at  one  another,  at  the 
babracote,  and  at  the  pepper-jwt  with  the  cassava  and  peppers:  they  now  felt  so 
ashamed  of  themselves  at  having  treated  the  young  man  so  badly  a  little  more  than  a 
year  ago  that  they  could  not  even  eat  the  cassava,  and  without  even  touching  it, 
told  their  hostess  to  "take  the  pot  away."  '  The  elder  of  the  two  visitors  rose  to  leave, 
and  expected  her  daughter  to  do  the  same,  but  the  latter  said,  "No!  I  intend  staying 
here  with  my  first  husband;  whether  he  beats  me  or  not,  I  don't  care.  He  has  turned 
out  far  better  than  my  second  one! "  So  when  her  mother  had  got  out  of  sight,  she 
went  up  to  the  hammock  where  the  man  was  resting,  and  climbed  in,  saying,  "I 
have  come  back  to  you,  my  sweetheart."  He,  however,  immediately  pushed  her 
out,  saying,  "I  don't  want  you.  I  am  the  lazy,  ignorant,  and  worthless  man  whom 
you  scorned  a  year  ago."  She  tried  again  to  climb  into  his  hammock,  but  he  would 
not  have  her:  she  spoke  "sweet-mouth"  to  him,  but  he  would  not  listen:  crestfallen, 
she  left  him,  to  return  to  her  own  people  and  her  second  husband,  but  the  first  one 
remained  alone  in  his  hammock  and  was  glad  to  hear  her  go. 

378A.  I  have  been  unable  to  confirm  Brett's  statement  as  to  the 
members  of  the  Demarena,  a  particvJar  family  group,  being  restricted 
to  connubiiun  only  with  those  of  the  Korobohana  family  group 
(BrB,  179);  otherwise,  all  the  Guiana  Indian  tribes  are  exogamous 

1  Whenever  a  visitor  comes  to  a  house,  he  is  offered  something  to  eat  or  drink;  to  express  Ms  satisfaction 
at  having  had  enough,  he  informs  his  hostess  accordingly  in  this  terse  maimer. 


BOTH]  SEXUAL   LIFE  819 

and  trace  descent  exclusively  through  the  mother.  Certainly  among 
the  Arawaks  and  Warraus,  sexual  union  between  persons  of  certain 
degrees  of  cousinship  is  regarded  in  the  same  light  as  is  incest  by 
Europeans.     (See  Sect.  131.) 

279.  An  analysis  of  the  pre-natal  and  post-natal  ordeals  under- 
gone by  father  and  mother  bring  into  prominence  the  fact  that  they 
bear  remarkably  strong  resemblance  to  those  submitted  to  at  puberty 
(by  both  sexes)  and  at  menstruation  (Sect.  £67  et  seq.).  In  the 
main,  these  ordeals  consist  of  food  restrictions;  the  tolerance  of  severe 
physical  pain  without  visible  signs  of  suffering;  and  procedures  con- 
nected with  isolation,  with  water,  fire,  and  cooking.  The  proper  per- 
formance of  the  childbirth  ordeals  insures  that  nothing  wiU  go  amiss 
with  the  baby.  With  regard  to  the  food  restrictions,  before  the  child's 
birth,  these  may  be  imposed  on  both  parents. 

Some  of  the  men  of  the  Akawai  and  Carib  nations,  when  they  have  reason  to  expect 
an  increase  of  their  families,  consider  themselves  bound  to  abstain  from  certain  kinds 
of  meat,  lest  the  expected  child  should,  in  some  very  mysterious  way,  be  injured  by 
their  partaking  of  it.  The  acouri  (or  agouti)  is  thus  tabooed  lest,  like  that  little 
animal,  the  child  should  be  meager;  the  Haimara  also,  lest  it  should  be  blind,  the 
outer  coating  of  the  eye  of  that  fish  suggesting  film  or  cataract;  the  labba,  lest  the 
infant's  mouth  should  protrude  like  the  labba's,  or  lest  it  be  spotted  like  the  labba, 
which  spots  would  ultimately  become  ulcers.  The  marudi  is  also  forbidden,  lest 
the  infant  be  still-bom,  the  screeching  of  that  bird  being  considered  ominous  of  death. 
[Br,  355.] 

Among  the  Pomeroon  Arawaks,  though  the  killing  and  eating 
of  a  snake  duriog  the  woman's  pregnancy  is  forbidden  to  both  father 
and  mother  the  husband  is  allowed  to  kill  and  eat  any  other  animal. 
The  cause  assigned  for  the  taboo  of  the  snake  is  that  the  httle  infant 
might  be  similar,  that  is,  able  neither  to  talk  nor  to  walk.  Neither 
parent,  however,  when  carrying  a  piece  of  cassava  cake,  may  either 
turn  it  over  in  the  hand,  or  curl  it  up  at  the  sides ;  otherwise,  the  ears 
of  the  child,  when  born,  wiU  be  found  curled  over.  Any  game  hunted 
by  dogs  is  strictly  forbidden  the  pregnant  woman  of  this  tribe,  just 
as  it  is  at  her  menstruation;  otherwise  the  dog  would  be  spoiled  for 
hunting  purposes,  permanently  in  the  latter  circumstances,  tempo- 
rarily in  the  former,  the  dog  recovering  its  powers  only  when  the 
baby  was  born.  Hence,  when  a  man  brings  home  any  animal  that 
has  been  hunted  by  a  dog,  it  is  his  wife's  business  to  see  that  it  is 
not  partaken  of  by  any  woman  in  either  of  the  states  named. 
An  interesting  reference  to  this  belief  will  be  found  in  TimeTiri  (vol. 
II,  1883,  p.  355),  in  which  report  is  made  of  a  woman's  wages  being 
stopped  because,  while  weediag;  she  partook  of  the  game  caught  by 
a  hunting  dog  and  so  rendered  tbe  dog  useless.  She  is  forbidden  to 
eat  when  pregnant  any  "big  meat,"  as  turtle  or  tapir,  or  fish  that 
has  much  blood  in  it,  as  at  menstruation;  she  can  now  eat  only  the 
tail  portion  of  a  fish.     Infringement  of  any  of  these  rules  will  result 


320  ANIMISM   AND  POLK-LOEE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS   [eth.  ANN.  30 

in  something  being  amiss  with  the  child  when  born.  The  Indians  of 
the  Uaupes  River,  Rio  Negro,  "believe  that  if  a  woman,  during  her 
pregnancy,  eats  of  any  meat,  any  other  animal  partaking  of  it  will 
suffer;  if  a  domestic  animal  or  tame  bird,  it  will  die;  if  a  dog,  it  will 
be  for  the  future  incapable  of  hunting;  and  even  a  man  will  ever 
after  be  unable  to  shoot  that  particular  kind  of  game"  (ARW,  349) : 
hence,  meat  has  to  be  avoided  by  her.  A  Pomeroon  Arawak  female 
wiU  beget  twins  through  eating  any  double  fruit  during  the  period  of 
her  pregnancy.  The  SaHva  husband,  however  (G,  i,  189),  regarded 
such  a  result  as  a  sure  sign  of  his  wife's  disloyalty,  believing  that  only 
one  of  the  twins  could  possibly  be  his.  Another  pregnancy  restriction 
on  the  Pomeroon  is  that  the  Arawak  woman  must  not  laugh,  and 
must  not  grieve;  'neither  may  she  look  at  the  face  of  a  dead  person 
though  it  is  permissible  for  her  to  gaze  on  the  body. 

380.  And  even  when  the  baby  does  put  in  an  appearance,  the 
mother's  troubles,  like  the  father's,  are  far  from  over;  for  until  her 
youngster  is  able  to  walk  well,  the  Arawak  mother  on  the  Pomeroon 
must  eat  neither  deer,  furtle,  nor  iguana,  animals  which,  for  some 
days  after  birth,  creep  or  crawl  very  slowly,  in  contradistinction,  for 
instance,  from  the  bush-hog,  that  will  start  to  rim  directly  it  has 
littered.  The  idea  is  that  by  eating  such  flesh  the  mother  will  cause 
her  infant  to  walk  too  slowly.  On  the  islands,  the  Carib  mother 
abstained  from  female  crabs,  which  would  give  the  child  stomach- 
ache, while  the  father  had  to  avoid  certain  animals  for  fear  of 
the  youngster  participating  in  their  natural  faults.  If  a  father 
ate  tiu-tle,  the  child  would  be  heavy,  and  have  no  brains;  if  he  ate  a 
parrot,  the  child  would  have  a  parrot  nose;  if  a  crab,  the  conse- 
quence would  be  long  legs  (BBR,  248-9).  The  mainland  Caribs  of 
Cayenne  (Galibis)  avoided  deer,  hog,  and  other  large  game  (PBa, 
223-4).  Brett,  in  a  quotation  apparently  from  McClintock,  says  that 
the  Akawai,  Carib,  and  Warrau  husband  abstains  from  venison 
after  his  wife's  delivery  for  the  same  reason  that  the  Arawak  mother 
shuns  it  (Br,  356).  The  Roucouyenne  father  must  eat  no  fish  or  game 
that  has  been  caught  with  an  arrow,  but  must  content  himself  with 
cassava  and  with  small  fish  that  have  been  poisoned  with  the  "nicou" 
plant;  should  he  disregard  this  taboo  the  child  will  either  soon  die 
or  develop  vicious  propensities.  For  the  Carib  Islander,  paternity 
must  undoubtedly  have  proved  somewhat  trying;  for  ten  or  twelve 
days  he  had  "to  take  to  his  bed,"  and  subsist  on  a  little  cassava 
and  water;  he  ate  only  of  the  insides  of  the  cassava  cakes,  leaving 
the  outsides  for  the  subsequent  feasting;  for  from  6  to  10  or  12 
months  later  he  had  to  abstain  from  several  meats,  as  manati,  turtle, 
hog,  fowl,  and  fish,  for  fear  of  hurting  his  infant,  but  such  extreme 
fasting  was  carried  out  only  at  the  birth  of  the  first  male  child. 


BOTH]  SEXUAL   LIFE  321 

When  the  fasting  period  was  approaching  its  conclusion,  he  had  to 
submit  to  a  scarification,  by  means  of  agouti  teeth,  upon  his  shoulders 
without  a  murmur,  and  the  better  he  bore  this  infliction  the  more 
vahant  would  his  son  prove;  the  blood  thus  made  to  flow  was  not 
allowed  to  fall  onto  the  ground,  but  was  smeared  on  the  child's  face 
to  make  it  courageous  {ginereux)  (RoP,  550).  The  actual  termina- 
tion of  the  fast  must  here  have  been  celebrated  more  or  less  cere- 
moniously: "Placed  on  a  red-painted  seat,  the  women  bring  him 
food,  which  the  old  men  put  in  his  mouth,  as  they  would  do  to  a  child, 
the  cassava  and  the  fish  being  in  small  pieces;  he  eats  the  cassava,  but 
ejects  the  fish  after  chewing  it.  He  would  become  sick  if  he  began  to 
eat  too  well  at  once;  he  is  made  to  drink  by  being  held  by  the  neck" 
(BBR,  249).  The  scarification  and  fiogging  ordeals  of  puberty, are 
repeated  on  the  Carib  father,  both  island  and  mainland,  after  his  wife's 
deUvery  of  either  boy  or  girl :  the  reputed  idea  is  "  to  transfer  his  courage 
(muih)  to  the  children"  (ScR,  ii,  431).  In  the  former  case,  after  a 
coiirse  of  very  limited  diet  he  is  "brought  to  a  public  place,  looking 
like  a  skeleton,  and  standing  upright  on  two  large  flat  cakes  of  cassavas. 
The  sponsors  then  begin  to  scratch  and  cut  his  skin  with  very  sharp 
agouti  teeth.  They  first  begin  on  the  sides,  then  the  shoiilders,  from 
the  arm  to  the  elbow,  from  elbow  to  wrist,  and  from  the  thighs  to  the 
ankles.  .  .  .  He  is  then  painted  and  rubbed  with  roucou  leaves, 
pepper  seeds  and  tobacco  juice,  and  placed  on  a  red-painted  seat" 
(BBR,  248-9),  and  fed,  as  already  mentioned.  The  Mainland  Carib, 
the  Galibi  of  Cayenne,  after  some  weeks'  subsistence  on  a  stinted  diet, 
is  "scarified  on  various  parts  of  the  body  with  fish-bones  or  agouti 
teeth:  very  often  even  he  is  given  several  lashes  with  a  whip" 
(PBa,  223-4). 

381.  After  the  birth  of  the  baby  come  the  various  procedures  con- 
nected with  the  isolation  of  one  or  both  parents;  in  the  case  of  the 
father,  his  so-called  "lying-in"  is  spoken  of  as  the  couvade,  and  is 
met  with  in  many  tribes,  for  example,  Arawaks,  Warraus,  Caribs 
(who  call  the  practice  Icenonimdno) ,  Makusis,  and  Wapisianas.  In 
the  case  of  the  Mainland  Caribs  (Ca3^enne)  "when  their  wives  are 
confined  for  the  first  time,  the  newly  married  husband  has  to  sling 
his  hammock  high  up  to  the  ridge  of  the  house"  (PBa,  223-4). 
With  the  Island  Caribs,  if  the  child  is  a  firstborn  male,  the  hus- 
band, as  soon  as  the  woman  is  delivered,  goes  to  bed,  complains 
and  acts  as  though  he  had  been  dehvered  (BBR,  248),  and  submits 
to  a  restricted  diet,  etc.  As  with  the  Caribs,  so  with  the  Arawaks 
and  Warraus,  it  is  practically  the  husband  who  is  isolated,  and  does 
the  "lying-in."  Indeed,  in  these  three  tribes,  the  woman  is  isolated 
only  during  actual  delivery,  which  takes  place  either  out  in  the  bush, 
in  a  separate  shelter,  or  in  a  compartment  specially  partitioned  off  from 

15061°— 80  ETH— 15 21 


322  ANIMISM   AND  FOLK-LOEE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS   [ets.  ANN.  30 

the  rest  of  the  house.  With  the  bath  that  she  takes  within  a  com- 
paratively few  hours  after  the  interesting  event  has  occurred,  her 
isolation,  and  with  it  any  dangerous  influence  of  her  recent  condition, 
ceases.  The  woman  is  her  own  accoucheuse;  even  during  the  night 
and  in  wet  season  she  will  leave  the  house  and  retire  to  a  secluded' 
spot  near  by.  She  occupies  herself  with  her  daily  affairs  imtil  the 
last  moment:  she  may  come  home  with  a  quake  containing  the  baby 
instead  of  the  usual  cassava;  and  '.'on  the  morrow  she  is  prepared 
to  undertake  all  the  indoor  work  of  the  household"  (Da,  248).  Con- 
finement takes  place  either  in  the  forest  or  in  some  little  hut;  she  is 
always  alone  unless  some  difficulty  presents  itseK,  when  an  old  woman, 
will  attend  (PBa,  226).  With  the  Makusis  and  Wapisianas,  both 
parents  engage  in  a  "lying-in"  for  a  shorter  or  longer  period  after 
the  appearance  of  baby.  The  Makusi  father  takes  to  his  hammock, 
placed  near  that  of  his  wife,  until  the  navel-string  falls  off;  but  before 
doing  this,  if  he  has  no  separate  building,  he  will  prepare  a  palm-leaf 
partition  in  the  hut  (ScR,  ii,  314).  When  the  partition  was  finished, 
the  [Wapisiana]  husband  himg  up  in  it  both  his  own  and  his  wife's 
hammock,  and  therein  they  lay  to  "take  to  bed"  {die  Wochen  zu 
Mlten)  like  the  Makusis  (ScR,  ii,  389).  During  the  Ijdng-in  of  the 
mother,  or  couvade  of  the  father,  they  are  considered  equally  unclean, 
such  uncleanness  being  occasionally  regarded  as  persisting  for  long 
afterward.  Thus,  the  Mainland  Carib  (in  Cayenne)  is  obUged  to  devote 
himself  to  the  service  of  an  old  Indian  and  to  leave  his  wife  for  some 
months;  during  this  period  he  has  to  be  submissive  and  regard  himself 
as  a  real  slave  (PBa,  223-4).  When  in  couvade  a  visitor  enters  his 
house,  that  visitor's  dogs  will  soon  die  (Cr,  241).  The  Arawaks  and 
Warraus  say  that  if  a  man  during  the  period  he  ought  to  remain  in 
couvade  indulges  in  sexual  relations  with  any  woman  other  than  his 
wife,  the  infant  will  die  through  inabihty  to  exert  its  emunctory  powers. 
After  hghting  her  fire  and  supplying  her  with  drinking  cups  it  is  the 
duty  of  the  female  Wapisiana  population  to  keep  as  far  away  from 
the  lying-in  woman  as  possible  for  the  few  days  that  she  is  deemed 
unclean  (ScR,  ii,  389).  With  the  completion  of  the  couvade,  on  the 
upper  Tiquie  River,  among  the  Tuyuka  and  other  Indians,  the  grand- 
mother "smokes"  the  pathway  leading  from  the  maMca  to  the  water, 
as  well  as  the  water  itself,  before  the  parents  have  their  first  bath 
(KG,  I,  312).  With  the  Uaupes  River  (Rio  Negro)  Indians,  when  a 
birth  takes  place  in  the  house,  everything  is  taken  out  of  it,  even 
the  pans  and'  pots,  and  bows  and  arrows,  till  the  next  day  (ARW, 
345).     . 

381A.  In  connection  with  this  question  of  couvade,  it  is  of  interest 
to  note  that  from  among  the  Caribs  I  obtained  a  trace  of  an  idea  of 
the  male  acting  as  the  parturient  parent. 


both]  sexual  life  323 

The  Broken  Egg  (C) 

XJraima  once  had  La  hia  possession  a  bird's  egg,  which  he  kept  in  a  calabash;  he 
took  great  care  of  it  until  it  should  hatch  out.  He  met  two  girls  on  the  road:  they 
saw  the  egg  and  asked  him  to  let  them  have  it.  "Nol"  he  said,  "I  can  not."  They 
worried  and  even  followed  him,  but  he  still  refused.  So  they  seized  the  e^,  and 
in  the  course  of  the  scuffle  broke  it.  Uraima  then  spoke  to  the  women  as  follows: 
"Since  you  have  done  this,  trouble  will  follow  you  from  now  onward.  Up  to  the 
present,  the  egg  has  belonged  to  man.  For  the  future  it  will  belong  to  woman  and 
she  will  have  to  hatch  it."     It  is  only  the  female  that  lays  eggs  nowadays. 

282.  There  seem  to  be  some  curious  restrictions  concerning  water, 
so  far  as  the  father  is  concerned,  both  previous  and  subsequent  to  birth. 
R.  L.  Kingston  gives  the  following  interesting  pre-natal  example: 
"While  some  (True)  Caribs  were  poisoning  the  upper  Pomeroon 
with  haiari  for  fish,  I  saw  one  of  them  rub  his  shins  with  the  beaten 
and  washed-out  haiari.  Asking  why  he  did  this,  he  told  me  his  wife 
was  with  child,  and  that  he  could  not  therefore  go  into  the  water 
without  first  rubbing  his  legs  with  haiari,  lest  aU  the  fish  should  sink 
to  the  bottom"  [instead  of  floating  narcotized  on  the  surface]  (Ti,  n, 
1883,  p.  355).  It  was  said  to  be  a  custom  of  the  Island  Caribs 
that  "they  often  deUver  near  the  fire,  and  the  chUd  is  bathed  at 
once;  but  a  funny  precaution  is,  that  if  it  is  bom  at  night,  the  men 
who  are  sleeping  in  the  house  go  and  bathe  so  that  the  child  may  not 
catch  cold"  (BBR,  248-9).  It  is  curious  that  the  Pomeroon  Arawak 
women  will  not  bathe  their  infants  until  such  time  as  the  navel- 
string  heals,  for  fear  of  the  same  contingency  happening.  On  the 
other  hand,  his  usual  bath  is  forbidden  the  Makusi  father  (ScR,  ii, 
314)  during  his  time  of  couvade.  Strange  to  say,  it  is  the  bath  which 
in  most  tribes  constitutes  the  final  piuification  of  the  mother,  at  the 
end  of  her  lying-in  period,  whether  such  period  be  of  a  few  hours'  or 
several  days'  duration:  Beyond  what  has  already  been  mentioned 
concerning  fire — how  some  women  (Island  Caribs)  wiU  often  dehver 
near  a  fire  and  how  others  will  apparently  have  one  hghted  for 
them — I  have  found  no  further  references  to  childbirth  in  connection 
with  fire,  except  one  in  connection  with  the  navel-string.  Bancroft 
is  the  only  author  who  speaks  of  the  division  of  "the  umbilie  vessels, 
which  they  do  with  a  brand  of  fire,  which  cauterizes  their  orifices, 
and  renders  a  ligatmre  unnecessary"  (Ba,  330).  Two  old  Arawak 
women  are  my  authority  for  saying  that  in  the  old  days  the  cord  was 
burned  off  with  a  heated  nail.  Cooking  for  a  man  is  strictly  prohib- 
ited to  a  pregnant  woman:  she  may  however  "clean"  the  meat,  but 
in  cleaning  any  animal  or  fish  she  must  not  cut  off  the  ears,  nails,  or 
fins.  In  this  latter  connection  there  is  a  curious  prohibition  con- 
cerning fingernails  in  force  among  the  Makusis :  neither  men  nor  women 
at  times  of  couvade  or  lying-in  must  scratch  their  bodies  or  heads 


324  ANIMISM   AND   FOLK-LORE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS   [eth.  ANN.  30 

with  their  nails.  A  piece  of  the  midrib  of  the  kokerite  pahn  is 
specially  employed  for  the  purpose  (ScK,  ii,  314). 

283.  In  many  of  the  tribes  during  the  couvade,  and  often  for  long 
afterward,  the  husband  is  prohibited  from  engaging  in  certain  of  his 
ordinary  occupations.  The  Pomeroon  Arawak  must  neither  smoke, 
lift  any  heayy  weight,  use  a  fish-hook,  nor  have  intimate  relations 
with  any  woman.  The  Mainland  Carib  of  Cayenne  was  not  allowed 
to  cut  any  big  timber  with  an  ax  (PBa,  223-4).  The  Makusi  must 
not  touch  his  weapons  (ScR,  ii,  313).  Should  these  and  similar  pro- 
hibitions be  not  observed,  some  evil  would  be  sure  to  befall  the  child. 
There  is  another  interesting  example  recorded  of  a  man  ( ?Arawak) 
during  couvade  lying  in  his  hammock  and  twisting  a  new  bowstring; 
baby. began  to  scream,  with  the  result,  that  the  father  had  to  undo 
the  whole  hne  (Ti,  ii,  1883,  p.  355). 

When  one  reahzes  what  the  Indian  conception  of  child-life  is,  the 
explanation  of  the  above  otherwise  extraordinary  customs  becomes 
comparatively  simple.  In  its  material  as  weU  as  in  its  spirit  nature 
the  baby  is  beheved  to  be  part  and  parcel  of  both  parents,  and  even 
at  birth  is  not  considered  to  have  an  independent  existence.  Its 
material  dependence  on  the  father  ceases  only  when  the  navel-string 
is  finally  detached,  the  signail  for  the  male  parent  to  conclude  his 
"hatching"  or  couvade.  The  baby's  spirit  nature  does  not,  how- 
ever, usually  free  itself  from  the  mother  until  the  lapse  of  many 
months,  when  it  begins  to  crawl  or  walk  (an  occasion  which  in  some 
tribes  seems  to  have  been  celebrated  by  a  festival,  with  hair  cutting 
and  other  features) ;  hence,  all  this  time,  whatever  can  aflfect  the 
mother  in  the  way  of  food,  or  otherwise,  exerts  a  corresponding  influ- 
ence on  the  child.  On  the  other  hand,  its  spirit  nature  may  occasion- 
ally tend  to  wander  all  on  its  own  account.  Thus,  when  a  Monica 
River  woman  is  carrying  her  very  young  infant  along  a  pathway  and 
happens  to  meet  a  cross  path,  she  will  break  off  a  leaf  or  two  from 
an  adjoining  bush,  and  throw  it  on  the  latter;  baby's  Spirit  must 
follow  her  and  not  go  off  in  another  direction.  On  the  conclusion  of 
the  couvade  the  baby's  spirit  nature,  though  physically  freed  from 
the  Spirit  of  the  father,  and  in  that  sense  independent  of  it,  never- 
theless accompanies  the  father  for  a  similar  period,  that  is,  until  it 
can  crawl,  and  can  be  influenced  by  it  so  long  as  the  companionship, 
so  to  speak,  is  retained.  When  the  infant  begins  to  crawl,  its  hair 
is  cut  for  the  first  time.  Rev.  Mr.  Dance  was,  I  beUeve,  among  the 
first  to  appreciate  fuUy  the  true  signification  of  these  facts  in  con- 
nection with,  presumably,  the  Arawaks.  I  myself  have  had  oppor- 
timities  for  studying  them  among  Arawaks  as  well  as  Warraus. 

The  infant  Spirit  clings  to  the  father,  gazes  upon  him,  follows  him  wherever  he 
goes,  and  for  the  time  being  is  as  intimate  and  familiar  with  the  father,  as  he  is  with 
his  own  infant  body  with  which  the  infant  Spirit  is  only  recently  associated.     How 


BOTH]  SEXUAL   LIFB  325 

then  can  the  father  ...  go  out  to  the  forest  or  field  to  use  an  ax  or  cutlass,  when 
the  Spirit  of  the  child  which  follows  him  as  a  second  shadow  might  be  between  the 
ax  and  the  wood?  How  cUmb  a  tree,  if  the  infant  spirit  is  also  to  essay  the  climbii^, 
and  fall,  perhaps  to  the  injury  of  the  infant  lying  in  the  hammock?  How  hunt  when 
the  arrow  might  pierce  the  accompanying  spirit  of  the  child,  which  would  be  death 
to  the  little  mortal  at  home?  If,  traveling  through  the  woods  you  happen  to  meet  a 
tairu  leaf,  which  is  formed  very  much  in  shape  of  a  corial,  floating  on  a  stream  or  pond 
of  water,  and  furnished  with  a  tiny  wooden  seat  and  paddle,  cut  out  and  placed  therein: 
or  should  you,  in  stepping  over  a  fallen  tree  discover  two  sticks  each  placed  from  the 
ground  to  the  trunk  of  the  tree,  disturb  them  not.  .  .  .  When  the  father  wades  through 
the  water,  the  toddling  spirit  .  .  .  must  paddle  over  in  the  taini-leaf  boat:  and  when 
his  sire  crosses  over  the  stump,  the  little  temporary  bridge  enables  the  infantile  Spirit 
to  cUmb  over.  .  .  But  notwithstanding  the  greatest  vigilance,  the  little  Spirit  is 
sometimes  lost,  and  then  the  body  pines  and  dies  if  the  Piai  doctor  is  not  fortunate 
enough  to  recover  it.     [Da,  249.] 

For  my  own  part,  I  am  very  much  inclined  to  believe  that  this 
little  Baby  Spirit  is  identical  with  the  Familiar  Spirit  (Sect.  93 A). 

284.  In  view  of  the  facts  mentioned  throughout  this  chapter  it  is 
as  well  to  note  that,  on  the  Orinoco,  when  an  infant  (male  or  female) 
was  bom  with  any  defect  or  monstrosity  it  was  put  to  death  (G,  ii, 
60).  Similar  procedure  was  in  vogue  in  Cayenne  (PBa,  227),  while 
Schomburgk  states  that  "the  shocking  practice  of  destroying 
deformed  children  is  not  so  general  among  the  savages  of  Guayana 
as  has  been  supposed"  (ScF,  219).  On  the  Amazon  there  was  the 
curious  custom  of  killing  all  the  first-bom  children  among  the  Xim&- 
nas  and  Cauxanas,  tribes  met  with  between  the  Ifa  and  Japura 
Rivers  (ARW,  355) .  Among  the  Zaparos  of  the  Napo  River  (upper 
Amazon),  when  a  mother  having  a  very  young  child  dies,  the  child 
is  sometimes  buried  ahve  (Sect.  76)  with  her  (AS,  175).  On  the 
Orinoco,  among  the  Sahvas,  twins  were  considered  a  sign  of  dishonor. 

They  call  the  mother  nicknames;  some  say  that  she  is  of  the  rodent  family,  which 
bear  little  rats  four  at  a  time,  etc.  Directly  a  Saliva  savage  gives  birth  to  a  baby  and 
feels  that  still  another  remains,  she  will  bury  the  first  rather  than  put  up  with  the  jokes 
and  chafSng  of  her  neighbors,  or  merit  the  frown  with  which  her  husband  regards  it. 
The  husband's  view  is  that  only  one  of  those  twins  can  possibly  be  his;  the  presence 
of  the  other  is  a  sure  sign  of  his  wife's  disloyalty.  One  of  the  Indian  captains  gives  his 
wife  a  whipping  in  public  for  having  dared  to  bring  forth  twins;  and  warns  the  other 
women -as  to  the  serious  beating  he  will  give  them  if  they  do  the  same.    [G,  i,  189.] 

The  same  thing  takes  place  on  the  River  Cuduiary,  among  the 
Kob6was,  at  the  present  day,  the  second-bom  of  the  twins  being 
killed,  but  if  of  different  sexes,  the  girl  is  sacrificed  (KG,  ri,  146). 

!384A.  There  are  certainly  traces  of  a  belief  in  sexual  relationships 
having  no  necessary  connection  with  the  production  of  children. 
Even  at  the  present  day  women  can  cohabit  with  Water  Spirits 
without  disastrous  consequences  resulting  (Sect.  186).  On  the 
other  hand  women  can  get  babies  if  they  want  them,  by  eating  certain 
binas,  plant  or  animal  (Sects.  237,  238) ;    in  a  case  of  this  kind  the 


326  ANIMISM   AND  FOLK-LOEE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS   [eth.  ANN.  30 

child  is  already  in  existence,  its  body  being  attached  to,  and  by  some 
mysterious  means  passing  into,  the  body  of  the  mother.  As  to  the 
origin  of  such  babies,  aU  I  can  gather  is  that  they  arrive  in  the  water  or 
in  the  bush,  and  hence  may  make  their  appearance  in  our  mundane 
world  either  as  a  gift  from  the  Water  Spirits  (Sect.  186),  or  at  the 
instigation  of  the  Spirits  of  the  Forest  (Sects.  117,  302),  with  or 
without  the  agency  of  the  piai.  The  following  is  a  Warrau  story 
bearing  on  this  subject; 

The  Little  Bush  Child  (W) 

A  long  time  ago  it  was  customary  for  a  woman,  when  she  yearned  for  a  child,  to 
wander  about  in  the  forest  until  she  found  one.  It  so  happened  that  a  certain  woman, 
Yaburawdko,  in  going  to  her  field  found  a  little  child  on  the  road — a  pretty  boy  he 
was — and  she  brought  hiTn  home.  She  minded  him,  and  he  had  sense  enough  to  call 
her  "Mdma. "  By  and  by,  however,  the  child  got  mischievous,  and  made  her  vexed. 
She  said,  "You  have  really  nothing  to  do  with  me;  so  why  should  you  annoy  me?" 
The  husband  remonstrated  with  her,  expressing  himself  to  her  somewhat  as  follows: 
"You  must  not  be  angry  with  the  child,  but  must  mind  him  carefully. "  She  con- 
tinued, however,  to  be  cross  with  the  boy,  and  finally  ill-treated  him.  "I  am  not 
going  to  be  bothered  with  you  any  more,"  she  exclaimed.  "You  have  nothing  to 
do  with  me.  You  are  not  mine.  You  don't  belong  to  me. "  With  this,  the  child 
disappeared,  whereupon  the  husband  said:  "Well,  he's  gone  now,  but  he  will  come 
back  again,  and  this  time  enter  youi  body,  and  you  will  have  trouble  enough  to  get 
rid  of  him. "  Sure  enough,  after  a  time  the  child  did  enter  her  womb,  and,  oh !  the 
trouble  and  the  pains  she  suffered  before  she  was  delivered  of  him.  Women  ever 
since  have  borne  children  in  this  manner  just  because  Yaburaw&o  was  so  unkind 
to  the  little  bush  child. 

284B.  Arawaks  beUeve  that  birth-marks  and- moles  (namarakan)  are 
due  to  the  failure  of  the  mother,  during  pregnancy,  to  get  what  she 
wanted.  She  may  have  said,  "Oh!  how  I  should  like  to  have  just  a 
bit  of  marudi! "  thoughtlessly  placing  her  hand  on  her  face,  breast, 
body,  or  thigh;  her  baby  wiU  be  born  with  a  corresponding  mark  on 
the  particular  part  touched.  The  "Mongohan  spot"  is  regarded  by 
the  women  as  due  to  the  position  of  the  afterbirth  being  near  the  sur- 
face in  the  corresponding  part  of  the  mother's  body.  The  Moruca 
River  Arawaks  call  this  spot  tvr-tebe,  but  as  it  begins  to  "fade  it  is  known 
as  anakwarro. 


Chaptee  XVII 
THE  MEDICIKE-MAN 

Medicine-men  practise  what  they  preach:  Names  (S85);  respected  and  feared  both 
alive  or  dead  and  may  be  given  offerings  (286),  but  occupy  no  position  necessarily 
distinctive,  as  captain  of  tribe  (287). 

Insignia  and  paraphernalia:  bench  (288),  rattle  (289),  doll  or  manikin,  identical 
with  idol  or  zemi  of  Antilleans  (290),  quartz  crystals  (291);  miscellaneous  kickshaws 


Office,  hereditary  (29S).  Female  doctors  (294).  Consulting-room  (295).  First 
Piai  (296).    Apprenticeship  and  Installation  (297). 

Power  over  Spirits:  of  animals  (298),  of  himself  (e.g.  invisibility)  and  of  other 
Indians  (299). 

As  interpreter  of  dreams  (SOO);  seer  or  prophet  (SOI);  his  general  versatility  (SOg- 
SOS);  guardian  of  the  tribal  traditions  (S04);  the  giver  of  personal  names  (SOS);  his 
treatment  of  sickness  and  disease  (S06). 

Disease  and  treatment:  signification  (507);  usual  treatment  by  Arawak  piai  (SOS); 
by  Carib  (S09);  by  Galibi  (SIO);  by  ?Oyampi  (Sll);  by  Makusi  (S12);  by  Indians  of 
Caracas  (SIS);  by  Carib  Islanders  (SH).  Spirits  specially  invoked  in  cure  (S15); 
objects  extracted  from  patients  (5i6) ;  dieting  of  patient's  relatives  and  family  (577); 
medical  fees  (S18);  Quack  doctors  (S19). 

385.  There  is  abundant  evidence  that  the  medicine-men  practised 
what  they  preached,  and  had  every  confidence  in  the  powers  with 
which  they  had  been  intrusted.  "They  practise  those  incantations 
over  their  own  sick  children,  and  cause  them  to  be  practised  over 
themselves  when  sick"  (BrA,  117).  "They  act  the  farce  on  them- 
selves when  they  are  disordered:  a  practice  which  has  not  a  little 
contributed  to  overthrow  aU  doubts  of  the  sincerity  of  their  preten- 
sions" (Ba,  314).  "The  piai  himself  beheves  in  it:  one  will  put  him- 
self in  the  hands  of  another  when  sick"  (Go,  13).  Schomburgk  was 
"convinced  that  the  piai  bfelieves  in  the  eflScacy  of  his  witchcraft  aa 
firmly  as  his  proteges"  (ScR,  n,  146).  The  real  causes  of  the  existing 
prejudice  against  the  medicine-men  are  not  far  to  seek,  and  have 
often  been  clearly  expressed.  "As  doctors,  augurs,  raui-makers, 
speU-binders,  leaders  of  secret  societies,  and  depositaries  of  the  tribal 
traditions  and  wisdom,  their  influence  was  generally  powerful.  Of 
course  it  was  adverse  to  the  Europeans,  especially  the  missionaries, 
and  also  of  coiu^e  it  was  generally  directed  to  their  own  interest  or 
that  of  their  class;  but  this  is  equally  true  of  priestly  power  wher- 
ever it  gains  the  ascendency,  and  the  injm-ious  effect  of  the  Indian 
shamans  on  their  nations  was  not  greater  than  has  been  in  many 
instances  that  of  the  Christian  priesthood  on  European  communities" 

327 


328  ANIMISM  AND  FOLK-LOKE   OF  GUIANA  INDIANS   [bth.  ann.  30 

(Bri,  55) .  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  not  a  single  recorded  instance 
of  the  Guianese  Indian  priesthood  ever  having  submitted  those  of 
their  people  holding  religious  Views  different  from  their  own  to  either 
torture  or  the  block.  The  Creole  term  for  the  priest-doctor  is  piai- 
man,  a  hybrid  that  seems  to  have  been  first  recorded  by  Waterton  in 
the  form  of  pee-ay-nxa,n,  who  is  an  enchanter;  he  finds  out  things  lost 
(W,  223).  In  its  simple  form,  the  word  of  course  came  into  use  much 
earlier,  and  is  seemingly  derived  from  the  Carib  piache,  which  GumiUa 
employs,  and  is  still  met  with  among  the  Pomeroon  group  of  these 
Indians  as  piesan.  Brett  (Br,  363)  derives  it  from  the  Carib  word 
puiai,  which  denotes  their  profession.  The  Akawais  call  it  piatsan. 
Dance  seems  to  derive  the  name  from  that  of  the  tribal  hero, 
Pia  (Sect.  4i)-  Cr6vaux  .in  Cayenne  speaks  of  piay,  de  Goeje  in 
Surinam  of  piai,  and  Bates,  throughout  the  extent  of  the  Amazons 
visited  by  him,  of  paji.  The  Warrau  word  for  the  priest-doctor  is 
vnshidatu  (wisiddd,  according  to  Brett),  similarly  applied  to  the 
kickshaws.  In  some  of  the  Orinoco  nations,  they  call  these  men 
Mojan:  in  others  Piache:  iu  others  AlabuqUi,  etc.  (G,  ii,  25). 
The  Piapocos  Indians  of  the  lower  Guaviar  River  speak  of  them  as 
Kamarikeri  (Cr,  526) ;  the  Caribs  of  the  lower  Caroni  River  as  Marirri 
(AVH,  III,  89),  and  the  Island  Caribs  as  Bove  (RoP,  473).  The 
Arawak  designation  is  of  equal  iaterest  and  also  of  extended  range: 
it  is  Semi-tcMchi  or  Semi-cihi,  the  same  term  applied  generally  to 
the  kickshaws  and  various  apparatus  employed  in  the  pursuit  of  the 
craft  (Sect;  93). 

386.  Both  ahve  and  dead,  the  medicine-men  had  the  respect' and 
fear  of  the  community.  They  were  the  teachers,  preachers,  coun- 
sellors, and  guides,  of  the  Indians;  "regarded  as  the  arbiters  of  life 
and  death,  everything  was  permitted,  and  nothing  refused  them; 
the  people  would  suffer  anything  at  their  hands  without  being  able 
to  obtain  redress,  and  with  never  a  thought  of  complaining" 
(PBa,  210).  They  thus  lived  "in  clover,"  (G,  ii,  24),  better  than  all 
the  rest  of  the  people  (St,  i,  399).  And  yet  in  a  sense  they  were 
restricted:  they  must  not  partake  of  the  flesh  of  the  larger  animals, 
but  limit  themselves  to  those  only  which  are  indigenous  to  their 
country  (ScR,  i,  173);  they  had  religiously  to  abstain  from  certain 
fish  and  game  (PBa,  211);  no  animal  food  was  publicly  taSted  by 
these  priests,  while  they  abstained,  even  more  strictly  than  the  laity, 
from  the  flesh  of  oxen,  sheep,  and  all  other  animals  that  had  been 
transported  from  Europe  (Sect.  247)  and  were  "unnatiiral"  to  their 
country  (St,  i,  399).  They  were  said  to  renew  their  piai  power  from 
time  to  time  by  drinking  tobacco  juice,  but  in  doses  not  so  strong  as 
at  the  time  of  installation  (PBa,  211).  As  stated  above,  even  dead 
the  medicine -men  were  still  respected. 


BOTH]  THE   MEDICINE-MASr  329 

They  also  keep  the  dead  bones  of  these  sorcerers  with  as  much  veneration  as  if  they 
were  the  Eeliques  of  Saints.  When  they  have  put  their  bones  together,  they  hang 
them  in  the  Air  in  the  same  cotton  beds  those  Wizards  use  to  live  in  when  alive, 
pa,  98.] 

Bates  gives  a  ciirious  example  of  such  veneration  and  sanctity, 
met  with  at  a  spot  on  the  Jabuni  channel,  Marajo  Island,  at  the 
mouth  of  the  Amazon,  "which  is  the  object  of  a  strange  superstitious 
observance  on  the  part  of  the  canoe-men.  It  is  said  to  be  haimted 
by  a  Paj6,  or  Indian  wizard,  whom  it  is  necessary  to  propitiate,  by 
depositing  some  article  on  the  spot,  if  the  voyager  wishes  to  secure  a 
safe  return  from  the  sertad,  as  the  interior  of  the  country  is  called. 
The  trees  were  all  hung  with  rags,  shirts,  straw  hats,  bunches  of 
fruits,  and  so  forth.  Although  the  superstition  doubtless  origiuated 
with  the  aborigines,  yet  I  observed,  in  both  my  voyages,  that  it  was 
only  the  Portuguese  and  imeducated  Brazilians  who  deposited  any- 
thing. The  pure  Indians  gave  nothing;  but  they  were  all  civilized 
Tapuyos"  (HWB,  115).  Koch-Griinberg  gives  a  similar  example 
on  the  River  Caiary-Uaupes  (Upper  Rio  Negro),  where  the  practice 
is  undoubtedly  observed  by  the  Indians  (KG,  i,  237),  while  Coudreau 
(ii,  404)  has  observed  it  on  the  Rio  Branco.  (Compare  the  protective 
charm  against  the  Curupira,  etc.,  in  Sect.  109.) 

387.  It  sometimes  happened  that  the  captain  and  the  piai  were 
one  and  the  same  person,  as  in  Cayenne  (PBa,  208).  But  on  the 
other  hand,  however  great  his  abilities,  the  medicine-man  did  not 
obtain  any  distinctive  position,  as  head  of  the  family,  through  his 
proficiency  (Go,  14).  Bancroft  (310)  says  that  in  almost  every 
family,  there  is  a  person  consecrated  to  the  craft.  There  was  appar- 
ently nothing  characteristic  about  the  piai  in  the  way  of  ornament 
or  decoration.  I  can  find  no  confirmation  of  Bernau's  statement 
that  the  novitiate's  "right  ear  is  pierced,  and  he  is  required  to  wear 
a  ring  all  his  lifetime"  (Be,  31). 

388.  The  insignia  and  "stock-in-trade"  of  the  medicine-man,  in 
his  highest  stage  of  development,  comprise  a  particular  kind  of  bench, 
a  rattle,  a  doll  or  manikin,  certain  crystals,  and  other  kickshaws, 
generally  something  out  of  the  common,  all  except  the  first  mentioned 
being  packed  away  when  not  in  use,  in  a  basket,  or  pegall,  which  is 
usually  of  a  shape  different  from  that  employed  by  the  lay  fraternity. 
The  pecuUarity  of  the  basket  among  Arawaks  and  Warraus  Hes  in 
both  top  and  bottom  being  concave.  St.  Clair  (i,  330)  reports  that 
on  the  Corentyn,  among  Arawaks,  he  came  across  the  "magical  shell" 
(rattle)  supported  by  three  pieces  of  stick,  the  ends  of  which  were 
stuck  into  the  ground,  in  the  middle  of  the  floor;  it  is  not  clear, 
however,  whether  in  this  situation  the  implement  was  being  used  or 
not.  At  any  rate,  all  the  insignia  were  taboo  to  the  common  folk 
and  were  kept  out  of  harm's  way  in  a  special  shed,  the  piai's  con- 


330 


ANIMISM   AKD   FOLK-LORE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS   [bth.  ANN.  30 


sulting-room,  so  to  speak.  Were  they  to  be  profaned,  they  would 
lose  their  intrinsic  virtues,  while  th«  delinquents  would  suffer  mis- 
fortunes of  various  descriptions.  The  bench  (the  TiaAa  of  the 
Arawaks) ,  plate  5,  differed  from  the  ordinary  article  of  furniture  usually 
met  with  in  Indian  houses,  in  being  larger,  often  painted,  and  carved 
in  fanciful  designs  of  various  animals,  but  little  is  known  concerning 
the  why  and  wherefore  of  the  selection  of  the  particular  beast;  thus, 
I  have  seen  the  turtle,  alligator,  tiger,  and  macaw  more  or  less  faith- 
fully represented  on  such  Warrau  and  Arawak  divining-stools. 

,        389.  The  rattle,  mardka  (an  Arawak 

word),  the  shdkshak  of  the  Creoles,  differs 
somewhat  in  shape,  size,  and  ornamenta- 
tion throughout  the  various  tribes.     It 
consists  essentially  of  a  large  cleaned-out 
"calabash,"  containing  stones  and  other 
objects,  through  which  a  closely  fitting 
tapering  stick  is  run  from  end  to  end  by 
means  of  two  apertures  cut  for  the  pur- 
pose (fig.  4) .    This  gourd  shell  ( Orescentia 
cujete  Linn.),  which  may  or  may  not  be 
painted  in  various  colors,  is  provided  with 
certain  small  circular  holes  as  well  as  with 
a  few  long  narrow  slits,  both  kinds  of 
openiags  being  too  small  to  allow  of  the 
contents  (either  quartz-crystals  or  a  spe- 
cies of  agate)  dropping  out.     Seeds  may 
be  employed  with  or  without  the  stones — 
small  pea-Hke  seeds  variegated  with  black 
and  yeUow  spots  which,  it  is  commonlv 
believed,  wili  occasion  the  teeth  to  fall 
out  if  they  are  chewed  (Ba,  311),  or  hard 
red   ones   (StC,  i,  320).     But  whether 
seeds  or  stones,  they  usually  have  some 
out-of-the-way  origin ;  the  former,  for  in- 
stance, may  have  been  extracted  from  the  piai  teacher's  stomach  (PBa, 
208);  the  latter  may  be  the  gift  of  the  Water  Spirits  (Sect.   185)'. 
According  to  a  Kahna,  the  power  of  the  mardJca  Hes  in  the  stones 
contained  therein  (Go,  14).     The  thicker,  projecting  part  of  the  stick 
constitutes  the  handle,  to  prevent  its  slippiag;  it  may  be  wrapped 
with  cotton  thread.     The  exposed  thinner  end  is  ornamented  with 
feathers,  as  those  of  the  parrot,  inserted  in  a  cotton  band,  which 
IS  then  wound  spiraUy  on  it.    An  Arawak  medicine-man  assured 
me  that  the  feathers  must  not  only  be  those  of  a  special  kind  of 
parrot  {Ps%ttacus  osstivus),  but  that  they  must  be  plucked  from  the 


FlQ.  4.  Pial's  rattle  (ArawakJ,  Pomeroon. 


BUREAU   OF  AMERICAN   ETHNOLOGY 


THIRTIETH   ANNUAL   REPORT      PLATE    5 


ARAWAK    DOCTORS'    BENCHES 
FROM    UPPER    MORUCA    RIVER 

A.— WITH   ALLIGATOR    AND  TIGER   (JAGUAR)    HEADS 

B.— WITH   HEAD  AND  TAIL  OF  MACAW;  REMAINDER   OF  BODY  PAINTED  ON  SEAT 


BOTH]  THE   MEDICINE-MAN  331 

bird  while  alive.  A  string  of  beetles'  wings  may  be  superadded. 
Gumilla  (i,  155)  states  his  behef  that  the  Aruacas  [Arawaks],  the 
cleverest  of  the  Indians,  were  the  inventors  of  the  mardka,  which 
even  in  his  day,  some  two  centuries  ago,  had  "also  been  introduced 
into  other  nations."  From  the  fact  that,  according  to  Indian  tradi- 
tion (Sect.  185),  the  original  rattle  was  a  gift  from  the  Spirits,  Dance 
(290)  accounts  for  the  great  veneration  in  which  it  is  held  even 
by  Christian  converts  who  have  ceased  to  use  it.  Brett  (Br,  364) 
confirms  this,  saying  that  there  are  Indians  who  fear  to  touch  it  or 
even  to  approach  the  place  where  it  is  kept.  I  have  had  personal 
experience  that  the  same  holds  true  today  in  the  Pomeroon.  So 
again,  on  account  of  the  agates  being  put  to  use  in  the  construction 
of  the  apparatus,  Bancroft  (21)  records  how  these  white  and  red 
stones  remain  untouched  where  they  are  found  in  abundance  above 
the  cataracts  of  the  Demerara.  In  speaking  of  the  Warrau  rattle, 
Schomburgk  says:  "If  the  sick  man  dies,  the  piai  buries  his  rattle 
also,  since  it  has  lost  its  power  now,  and  with  the  sick  person  its  heal- 
ing properties  die"  (ScR,  i,  172).  I  can  not,. however,  find  this  state- 
ment anywhere  confirmed. 

390.  Gumilla  (i,  155)  says  that  the  medico  makes  the  Indians 
beheve  that  the  mardka  speaks  with  the  Spirit  (demonio) ,  and  that 
by  its  means  he  knows  whether  the  sick  person  will  live  or  not.  This 
statement  does  not  exactly  agree  with  the  evidence  handed  down  to 
us  by  other  rehable  authors,  nor  does  it  quite  agree  with  what  I  have 
been  taught  and  have  seen  put  into  practice.  The  object  of  the 
rattle  is  to  invoke  the  Spirits  only;  it  is  rather  the  business  of  the 
manikin,  or  doll,  to  give  the  prognosis,  to  lend  assistance,  etc.  Men- 
tion is  made  of  such  an  object  in  Timehri  (Jvme,  1892,  p.  183) :  "Some 
few  months  ago,  a  gold  expert  and  prospector  while  traveling  along 
the  Barima  River,  came  upon  the  burial-place  of  an  Indian  Peaiman 
or  Medicine-man.  The  house  imder  which  the  burial  had  been  made 
was  hung  round  with  five  of  the  typical  peaiman's  rattle  or  shak-shak, 
and  over  the  grave  itself  was  placed  the  box  of  the  dead  man,  con- 
taining the  various  objects  which  had  been  the  instmments,  or  cre- 
dentials, of  his  calling.  The  contents  of  this  box  .  .  .  were  a  carved 
wooden  doll  or  baby."  The  doll,  or  manikin  (fig.  5),  which  I  saw 
used  for  the  purpose  on  the  Monica  River,  was  a  Uttle  black  one 
about  2i  inches  long,  balanced  "gingerly"  on  its  feet,  which  bore 
traces  of  having  been  touched  with  some  gummy  substance :  if  during 
the  course  of  the  special  incantation  it  remained  in  the  erect  position, 
the  patient  would  recover,  but  if  it  fell  over,  this  would  be  a  sure 
sign  of  his  approaching  death.  In  parts  of  Cayenne  the  doll  is 
replaced  by  the  Anaan-tanha,  or  Devil-figure  (Sect.  311),  which  is 
unmercifully  thrashed  with  a  view  to  compdling  the  Evil  Spirit  to 


332 


ANIMISM   AND  FOLK-LOKE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS   [bth.  ANN.  30 


W- 


leave  the  invalid.  The  identity  of  this  mainland  doll,  or  manikin, 
with  the  idol,  or  cemi,  of  the  Antilleans  has  already  been  indicated 
(Sect.  93). 

291.  The  crystals  are  employed  for  charming,  bewitching,  or 
cm-sing  others,  though  the  references  in  the  literatm:e  to  their  appli- 
cation in  this  manner  are  exceedingly  scarce.  Indeed,  I  can  call 
to  mind  only  the  following  from  Cr6vaux  (554):  "I  notice  on  the 
neck  of  one  of  them  [Guahibos  of  the  Orinoco]  a  bit  of  crystal  set  in 
the  cavity  of  an  alligator's  tooth.  The  whole  has  the  name  of 
guanare.  ...  It  is  with  this  guanare  that  the  Guahibos  throw  speUs 
(jgrtenidessortiZegres)  on  theirhated  neighbors,  the  Piaroas.  .  .  .  Every 
mineral  that  presents  in  its  lines  and  shape  a  certain  regularity  is  to 

them  the  wojk  of  a  devil  or  a  sorcerer." 
Cursing  and  similar  procedure  are  not,  how- 
ever, the  sole  prerogative  of  the  medicine- 
man, at  least  not  in  the  Pomeroon  District 
of  the  present  day;  the  procedure  is  known 
as  Tw-a  to  both  Warraus  and  Arawaks,  and 
is  practised,  I  am  told,  by  very  old  people. 
As  a  remedy  for  over-fatigue,  Schombiirgk 
describes  "Macusis  and  Wapisianas  cutting 
each  other's  legs  with  a  piece  of  rock  crystal, 
an  instrument  to  which  they  ascribed  partic- 
ular virtue,  refusing  instead  of  it  my  offer  of 
a  lancet''  (ScF,  235). 

393.  With  respect  to  remaining  kicksliaws, 
Pinckard  (i,  p.  505)  says:  "And  having  faith 
in  spells,  they  make  httle  decorated  instru- 
ments, of  tender  rushes  about  a  foot  long, 
which  their  physicians  or  priests  called  Pyeis 
employ,  together  with  other  magical  imple- 
ments, as  wands  to  drive  out  these  demons 
of  111."  These  instruments  I  have  been  unable  to  identify  thus  far. 
Finally,  on  the  authority  of  the  old  medicine-man  who  taught  me 
the  greater  part  of  what  I  Itnow  concerning  the  practice  of  the  art, 
a  "charm"  of  some  description  was  worn  on  the  chest  suspended 
by  a  cord  hung  round  the  neck  (Sect.  93).  The  one  that  my  late 
teacher  (Bariki)  employed  is  flat  and  oval,  made  of  some  resinous 
material,  and  ornamented  on  one  side  with  the  incised  figure  o^  a 
female  frog  (fig.  6) .  It  had  been  given  Bariki  by  his  grandfather  when 
the  latter  taught  him  his  profession,  and  when  the  old  man  died,  he 
left  it  to  me.  In  the  extract  from  Timehri  (1892,  p.  184)  above 
quoted,  where  is  to  be  found  a  list  of  the  kickshaws  appertaining 
to  the  piai-man's  stock-in-trade,  is  mentioned:  "a  neatly  carved 
representation,  in  reddish  quartz,  of  a  dog  sitting  on  its  haunches 


FiQ.  5.  The  piai's  manildn,  or  doll 
(Arawak),  Monica  Rirer.  (Note 
the  chest-ornament;  see  fig.  6.) 


BOTH] 


THE   MEDICINE-MAN 


333 


and  holding  its  front  well  up.  In  this  figure  the  base  of  the  fore 
legs  is  occupied  by  two  clearl3^-bored  holes,  into  which,  eTidently, 
it  had  been  the  custom  to  fit  strings  by  which  to  puU  the  Httle 
object  along  on  the  ground,  just  as  toys  are  usually  drawn  along 
by  small  children."  It  seems  to  me  far  more  reasonable,  under  the 
circumstances,  to  suppose  that  this  object  was  the  doctor's  chest- 
ornament  just  referred  to.  There  is  absolutely  no  evidence  of  any 
Guiana  Indian  toy  being  u§ed  in  this  manner,  and  it  is  ridiculous  to 
beheve  that  the  vast  amount  of  labor  necessarily  involved  in  carving 
quartz  and  boring  holes 
through  it,  would  be  ex- 
pended on  a  child's  play- 
thing. 

293.  The  office  of  the 
medicine-man  appears  to 
have  been  hereditary  and 
to  have  passed  to  the  eldest 
son(Ba,316).  Ifhehasno 
son  the  piai  picks  a  friend 
as  his  successor  (ScR,  i, 
172),  although  the  same 
authority  (Scho  m  b  u  r  g  k) 
elsewhere  states  that,  under 
these  circumsta n c e s ,  he 
chooses  the  craftiest  among 
the  boys  (ScR,  i,  423-4) .  It 
is  likely  that  the  secrets 
and  mysteries  of  the  pro- 
fession may  also  have  been 
imparted  to  outsiders  for  a  consideration.  I  happen  to  have  known 
one  of  the  fraternity  who  taught  another  his  profession  for  the  sum 
down  of  eleven  doUars  together  with  the  gift  of  his  daughter.  Im 
Thurn  (334)  says:  "If  there  was  no  son  to  succeed  the  father, 
the  latter  chose  and  trained  some  boy  from  the  tribe — one  with  an 
epileptic  tendency  being  preferred.  ...  It  has  been  said  that  epilep- 
tic subjects  are  by  preference  chosen  as  piaimen,  and  are  trained 
to  throw  themselves  at  wiU  into  convulsions."  Perhaps  this  idea  had 
its  origin  in  the  fact  that  through  the  use  of  a  narcotic  powder,  the 
piais  can  throw  themselves  into  a  condition  of  wild  ecstasy  (ScR, 
I,  423-4) :  several  such  powders  were  known  to  some  of  the  Guiana 
Indians,  as  the  Yufa  (G,  r,  181),  etc.  On  the  other  hand  I  can  find 
no  references  in  the  hteratm-e  to  the  choice  of  epileptic  subjects; 
furthermore,  the  unlikehhood  is  turned  into  impossibility,  when  it  is 
borne  in  mind  that  the  victim  of  such  a  convulsion  would  be  uncon- 
scious during  its  progress. 


Fig.  6.  The  piai's  cbest-ornament  (Arawak),  Moruca  Elver. 


334  AOTMISM   AND  FOLK-LOEE   OF   GTJIANA  INDIANS   [eth.  ANN.  30 

394.  Occasionally  the  piai  may  be  a  woman.  Thus,  I  knew  an 
old  Warrau  dame  who  used  to  practise  her  profession  in  the  neigh- 
borhood of  Santa  Rosa  Mission,  Moruca  River,  under  almost  the 
very  nose  of  the  unsuspecting  Father.  On  the  authority  of  Joseph 
Stoll,  Aiawak,  catechist  at  St.  Bede's  Mission,  Barama  River,  young 
women,  certainly  among  his  own  tribe,  used  to  be  trained  in  the  same 
manner  as  the  boys  for  the  profession  of  piai:  his  own  grandmother 
(on  the  father's  side),  and  his  father's  ,cousin  were  both  trained 
piai-women.  On  the  other  hand,  I  can  find  no  references  whatever 
to  woman  "doctors"  throughout  the  early  literature  of  the  subject. 

395.  The  medicine-man  usually  possesses  a  httle  outhouse  (Pome- 
roon  and  Moruca  Rivers),  plate  6,  in  wla.ch  he  keeps  his  various  in- 
signia :  theWarraus  call  it  hehu-lianolcu  (Spirit-house) .  This  building  is 
of  course  taboo,  as  indicated  by  a  bundle  of  kokerite  leaves  hung  over 
the  entrance.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  I  have  never  seen  the  doctor's 
"consulting-room"  in  the  Pomeroom  District  built  of  any  leaves  other 
than  kokerite.  At  Savonette,  Berbice,  the  "consulting-room,"  so 
to  speak,  must  have  been  a  somewhat  more  complicated  structitte, 
for  the  use  of  medicine-men  in  common.  "Near  to  the  cabins 
that  were  inhabited,  we  observed  a  detached  building  inclosed  on  all 
sides,  forming  a  single  room,  into  which  light  and  air  were  only 
admitted  at  the  doorway.  Upon  inquiry  we  learned  that  this  was 
devoted  to  the  use  of  the  sick — not  as  a  hospital,  but  as  a  temple  of 
incantation,  for  the  purpose  of  expelling  disease"  (Pnk,  i,  505). 
On  the  Amazons,  Father  Acufia  (98)  also  leads  us  to  believe  that 
there  was  in  each  settlement  one  special  building  for  the  use  of  aU 
these  doctors :  "  There  is  a  certain  house  devoted  to  the  use  of  these 
sorcerers,  in  which  they  perform  their  superstitious  exercises,  and 
converse  with  the  Devil." 

296.  The  original  piai  forms  the  subject-matter  of  legends  with 
which  Arawaks,  Warraus,  and  Caribs  are  all  more  or  less  conversant; 
members  of  all  these  tribes  assure  me  that  tobacco  was  brought  here 
from  the  islands,  but  I  will  let  a  Warrau  give  two  of  the  versions: 

The  Hummingbird  with  Tobacco  for  the  First  Piai  (W) 

A  man  had  been  living  with  a  woman  for  a  long,  long  time:  she  was  very  good  at 
making  hammocks,  but  could  not  bear  a  child.  So  he  took  unto  himself  a  second 
partner:  by  her  he  had  a  baby  and  was  now  happy.  The  infant,  Kurusiwari,  grew 
apace,  and  while  the  step-mother  would  be  weaving  her  hammock,  it  would  often 
come  and  hang  on  the  suspending  cord  and  slacken  it.  The  old  woman  stood  all 
this  little  annoyance  for  some  time,  but  one  day  when  the  child  was  even  more  mis- 
chievous than  usual,  she  said,  "Go  away,  and  play  over  there."  It  obeyed,  went  to 
a  distance,  but  soon  toddled  back  and  once  more  interfered  with  the  string.  The 
woman  now  pushed  the  youngster  aside,  and  in  so  doing  it  fell  and  cried.  No  one 
took  notice  of  the  incident  and  no  one  saw  it  toddle  out  of  the  house.  All  this  time 
its  father  and  mother  were  lying  together  in  their  hammock,  and  it  was  late  in  th« 


BOTH]  THE   MEDICINE-MAN  335 

day  when  its  presence  was  missed  by  them.  The  child  was  nowhere  to  be  found,  so 
they  went  over  to  a  neighbor's  and  there  they  saw  their  little  one  playing  with  some 
other  children.  They  explained  their  errand  to  the  house-people,  how  they  had 
come  to  seek  their  little  one,  and  so,  one  thing  leading  on  to  another,  they  entered 
into  an  animated  conversation,  and  forgot  all  about  their  real  business,  with  the 
result  that  when  they  did  finish  talking,  not  only  was  their  own  child,  Kurusiwari, 
but  also  one  of  the  house-children,  Matuia-wari,  nowhere  to  be  seen.  So  the  four 
parents  started  in  search  of  the  two  little  ones,  and  went  to  a  neighbor's  house,  where 
they  saw  them  playing  with  a  third  child,  Kdwai-wari.  But  the  same  thing  hap- 
pened at  this  house  as  at  the  previous  one — the  parents  all  got  into  conversation,  and 
forgot  their  real  business  until  finally  they  found  all  three  children  missing.  It  was 
a  case  now  of  six  parents  searching  for  three  infants;  but  at  the  end  of  the  first  day 
the  third  couple  abandoned  the  search,  and  at  the  end  of  the  second  day  the  second 
couple  did  likewise.  In  the  meantime  the  three  children  had  wandered  on  and  on, 
making  friends  with  the  marabuntafl  [wasps],  which  in  those  days  talked  but  did 
not  sting.  It  was  these  children  that  told  the  black  ones  to  sting  people,  and  the  red 
ones  to  give  them  fever  in  addition.  And  it  was  when  the  children  arrived  at  the 
seashore  that  the  first  pair  of  parents  met  them.  However,  by  this  time  they  were 
children  no  more,  but  big  boys.  When  the  parents  expressed  their  pleasiu-e  at  having 
found  them  at  last  and  of  course  expected  them  to  return  home,  the  leader  of 
the  three — Kurusiwari,  the  boy  who  had  been  lost  from  the  first  house — said:  "  I 
can  not  go  back.  When  my  stepmother  pushed  me,  I  fell  down  and  cried,  while 
you  would  not  even  look  at  me.  I  will  not  go  back."  But  when  both  father  and 
mother  implored  him  with  tears  to  return,  he  relented,  and  promised  them  that  if 
they  built  a  proper  heburhanohu  [lit.  Spirit^house],  and  "called"  him  with  tobacco, 
they  should  see  him.  He  and  the  two  other  boys  crossed  the  seas,  and  the  parents 
returned  home.  No  sooner  had  the  latter  arrived  there  than  the  father  started  building 
the  Spirit-house,  and  when  completed  he  burnt  pappaia  leaves,  and  cotton  leaves, 
and  coffee  leaves,  but  all  were  of  no  use— there  was  no  "strength"  in  any  of  them, 
and  this  strength  could  be  supplied  only  by  tobacco.  But  in  those  days  we  had 
none  of  this  plant  here :  it  grew  far  away  out  in  an  island  over  the  sea.  I  do  not  know 
whether  this  island  was  Trinidad,  or  not,  but  we  Warraus  call  it  Nibo-yuni  [lit.  Man- 
without]  because  it  was  peopled  entirely  by  women  [cf.  Sect.  3SS],  according  to 
what  the  old  people  tell  us.  Well,  the  sorrowing  father  sent  a  gaulding  bird  [Pilero- 
dius]  over  to  fetch  some  of  the  tobacco  seed:  but  as  it  never  returned,  he  despatched 
various  kinds  of  sea-birds  one  after  another,  and  they  all  met  with  the  same  fate. 
They  were  killed  by  the  watch-woman  as  soon  as  they  alighted  on  the  tobacco-field. 
Giving  up  all  hope  of  ever  seeing  any  of  his  messengers  again,  he  went  to  consult 
a  brother,  who  brought  him  a  crane.  This  bird  went  to  roost  down  near  the  seashore 
so  as  to  have  a  good  start  on  the  following  morning.  While  resting  there,  his  little 
friend  the  hummingbird  came  along  and  asked  him  what  he  was  doing.  "Getting 
ready  for  the  morning,  "  he  replied ;  "  I  have  to  fly  over  to  Nibo-yuni  and  fetch  tobacco 
seed. "  The  hummingbird  suggested  his  going  instead,  but  the  other  regarded  the 
proposal  as  absurd,  and  reminded  him  that  his  boat  was  too  small,  and  that  it 
would  sink.  Nothing  daunted,  however,  the  little  chap  rose  before  daylight,  as  is 
his  custom,  and  saying,  "I'm  off!"  took  to  flight.  At  daybreak  the  crane  spread  his 
wings,  and,  sailing  majestically  along,  got  about  halfway  across,  when  he  met  the 
hummingbird  struggling  in  the  water.  The  latter  had  made  a  gallant  attempt,  but 
could  not  of  course  make  headway  against  the  wind.  The  crane  picked  him  up  and 
placed  him  on  the  back  of  his  own  thighs,  which  stuck  out  behind.  Now,  this  posi- 
tion was  all  very  well  for  the  little  hummingbird  so  long  as  no  accident  occurred,  but 
when  the  crane  conunenced  to  relieve  himself,  the  hummingbird's  face  got  dirtied, 
and.he  thus  found  himself  forced  to  take  to  the  wing  again,  with  the  result  that,  reach- 
ing Nibo-yuni  first,  he  waited  for  his  big  friend,  who  arrived  shortly.    He  now  told  the 


336  AHIMISM   AND  FOLK-LOEE   OF   GUIAKA  INDIANS   [bth.  ANN.  30 

crane  to  remain  where  he  was,  while  he  would  visit  the  tobacco  field;  he  was  small, 
could  fly  swiftly,  and  no  one  would  see  him  stealing  the  tobacco  seed.  While  carrying 
out  his  design,  the  watch-woman  tried  to  shoot  him,  but  he  was  too  smart  for  her,  and 
darting  quickly  from  flower  to  flower,  soon  collected  as  much  seed  as  he  required,  and 
returned  to  the  crane.  "Friend, "  said  he,  "let  us  get  home  now, "  and  suiting  the 
action  to  the  word  the  little  creature  started  ahead,  and  now  with  the  wind  behind  him, 
reached  home  first  without  mishap.  Here  he  delivered  the  seed  to  the  crane's  master, 
and  the  latter  handed  it  to  his  brother,  telling  him  to  plant  it.  When  planted  it  grew 
very  quickly,  and  when  the  leaves  were  fully  grown,  the  brother  showed  him  how  tg 
cure  the  tobacco.  The  brother  also  sent  him  to  search  for  bark  to  suit  the  leaf  [i.  e.  to 
make  the  cigarette],  and  he  brought  the  winnam6ru;  which  was  just  what  was  required. 
He  next  sent  him  for  the  hehu-^mataro  [rattle]  and  he  brought  gourds  of  all  sizes,  but  at 
last  he  returned  with  a  calabash  that  he  had  picked  from  off  the  east  side  of  the  tree; 
this  was  the  very  thing.  The  bereaved  father  thereupon  started  "singing"  with  the 
rattle j"  and  his  son  and  the  other  two  lads  came  in  answer;  they  were  three  Spirits  now, 
and  all  three  addressing  him  as  father,  asked  for  tobacco,  with  which  he  supplied  them. 
It  is  these  same  three  Tobacco  Spirits,  Kumsiwari,  Matura-wari,  and  Kdwai-wari,  who 
always  answer  when  called  by  the  piai's  rattle,  and  as  a  matter  of  fact  it  was  the  poor 
bereaved  father  who  came  to  be  the  first  piai,  all  through  his  great  grief  at  losing  his 
child,  and  longing  so  much  to  see  him  once  more.^ 

296A.    KOMATAEI,    THE    FlKST  ItlEDICINE-MAN    (W) 

Komatari  wanted  some  tobacco,  but  as  there  was  none  about,  he  searched  for  it. 
He  had  heard-of  its  growing  on  an  island  out  at  sea,  so  he  went  down  to  the  shore,  where 
he  came  across  a  house  with  a  man  inside.  Approachii^  him,  Komatari  said:  "I  am 
poor,  and  want  tobacco.  I  hear  you  have  it  growing  on  an  island.  C!ould  you  get 
me  some  plants?  "  While  thus  engaged  in  conversation,  the  hummingbird  came  along, 
and  said,  "Hullo!  What  are  you  two  talking  about?  "  "Tobacco:  we  want  tobacco," 
they  replied.  "Oh,  is  that  all?"  the  little  bird  said;  "why,  I'll  go  and  fetch  some 
for  you.  I  shall  be  making  a  start  before  the  morning,  and  you  can  expect  me  back 
just  as  the  sun  begins  to  turn  that  way"  [pointing  in  a  direction  which  would  indicate 
about  an  hour  after  midday].  The  hummingbird  kept  his  word,  and  returned  as 
promised,  but  when  the  house-master  saw  what  he  had  brought  back,  he  said,  "Why, 
that  is  no  tobacco  leaf:  it  is  only  the  tobacco  flower,"  and,  turning  to  Komatari,  he 
said,  "I  will  go  myseH."  The  house-master  started  next  morning  for  the  same  island, 
telling  Komatari  to  expect  him  back  as  soon  as  the  hummingbird,  that  is,  shortly 
after  midday.  But  as  a  matter  of  fact,  he  never  returned  imtil  the  following  morning. 
The  cause  of  the  delay  was  that  so  many  people  were  watching  the  tobacco  that  he 
had  to  wait  for  nightfall  before  he  could  steal  the  leaves.  However,  giving  Komatari 
some  of  the  seed,  he  told  him  to  go  down  to  the  waterside,  where  he  would  find  his 
corial,  and  if  he  looked  inside  he  would  see  two  or  three  tobacco  leaves,  which  he 
might  take.  Komatari  did  as  directed,  but  instead  of  two  or  three  leaves  he  found 
the  whole  corial  full  of  them.  He  helped  himself  to  as  many  as  would  fiR  a  quake, 
and  went  home.  Before  taking  his  departure,  however,  the  house-master  said:  "I 
have  a  name,  but  will  not  mention  it:  when  you  know  all  about  Piai  [i.  e.  'Medicine'] 
you  will  be  able  to  find  it  out  for  yourself."  At  last  Komatari  reached  home,  and 
naturally  aU  his  friends  came  to  pay  him  a  visit,  to  get  some  of  the  tobacco;  but  he 
was  shrewd,  kept  the  tobacco  under  the  roof  [i.  e.  hanging  up  to  dry  in  the  ordinary 
manner]  in  charge  of  the  marabuntas  [wasps],  left  home  very  early  of  a  morning,  and 
only  returned  late,  so  as  not  to  be  at  home  when  anybody  called.    But  at  last  a  visitor 


1  For  further  account  of  the  relationship  between  hummingbirds  and  tobacco,  see  Sect.  S50. 


BOTH]  THE   MEDICINE-MAN  337 

came  and  made  a  very  long  stay  purposely.  They  thus  met,  Komatarl  gave  him 
three  leaves,  and  sent  him  away.  Next  day,  another  man  paid  him  a  visit,  but  Koma- 
tari  had  already  left,  and  only  marabuntafi  were  there — ^many  marabuntas,  all  of 
different  kinds.  The  visitor  went  home,  and,  taking  some  fish  with  him,  returned 
to  Komatari's  place  and  asked  the  marabimtas  to  let  him  have  some  tobacco,  at  the 
same  time  showing  them  his  fish  and  saying,  "Look!  this  is  the  payment."  And  so, 
while  the  marabimtas  all  swarmed  down  upon  the  fish,  the  man  climbed  up,  got 
what  tobacco  he  wanted,  and  cleared  out.  When  Komatarl  got  home,  he  also  got  up 
imder  the  roof  where  the  tobacco  was  stored,  but  found  much  of  it  mifising,  so  he  placed 
what  was  left  elsewhere,  and  drove  away  all  the  marabimtas  except  one  particular 
kind,  a  black  variety,  the  oro  [=yieseri  of  the  Arawaks],  which  he  made  his  watch- 
men. Starting  now  on  his  field,  he  cut  it  day  after  day,  and  after  burning  it,  at  last 
planted  his  tobacco.  When  he  saw  that  it  was  beginning  to  thrive,  he  buUt  a  piai- 
house,  and  going  roimd  his  field,  looked  out  for  a  calabash  tree;  he  found  one  fuU  of 
gourds.  He  took  one,  but  on  turning  round,  he  saw  a  Hebu,  who,  after  asking  whether 
it  belonged  to  him  and  getting  "Yes"  for  an  answer,  said:  "AU  right.  So  long  as 
the  calabash  is  yours,  you  may  have  the  whole  tree.  I  have  a  name,  but  will  not 
tell  it  you.  I  want  to  see  whether  you  leam  the  piai  business  weU.  If  you  do,  you 
will  be  able  to  find  it  out  for  yourself."  On  reaching  home  with  the  calabash,  Eoma- 
tari  started  cleaning  it  out.  When  cleaned,  another  Hebu  came  along  and  asked 
him  what  he  intended  doing  with  it,  but  Komatari  would  not  tell  him.  You  see 
this  particular  Hebu  was  the  one  who  comes  to  kill  people  and  so  was  afraid  of  the 
power  of  the  maraka  [rattle],  which  is  made  from  this  very  calabash.  After  scooping 
out  and  cleaning  the  .calabash,  Komatari  went  into  the  bush  and,  travehng  along, 
came  upon  a  creek  with  swiftly-flowing  water:  it  was  here  that  he  cut  the  timber 
from  out  of  which  he  next  shaped  the  handle  for  the  rattle  and  cut  the  sticks  to  make 
his  special  fire  with.'  Returning  home  once  more,  he  fastened  the  handle  in  the 
gourd,  but  was  not  satisfied  with  the  result:  the  rattle  did  not  look  as  it  should.  So 
he  hung  it  up  on  the  beam  of  his  piai-house,  and  went  once  more  into  the  bush,  where 
he  again  met  the  killing  Hebu,  who  repeated  his  question  as  to  what  Komatari  intended 
doing  with  the  rattle,  but,  as  before,  the  latter  would  not  tell  him.  Passing  along, 
and  hearing  a  noise  as  of  many  people  talking,  Komatari  proceeded  in  the  direction 
whence  the  sound  came,  and  found  a  number  of  Hebus  fastening  various  parrot 
feathers  into  cotton-twine.  How  pretty  this  ornament  would  look  tied  on  his  calabash 
left  hanging  up  at  home,  was  Kojnatari's  first  thought  when  he  saw  what  they  were 
doing.  On  asking,  the  ornament  was  given  him.  The  Hebu  who  gave  it  to  him  said: 
"I  have  a  name,  but  I  will  not  tell  it  to  you.  You  can  find  it  out  for  yourself,  if  you 
should  ever  become  a  good  piai-man."  Komatari  next  asked  him  for  another  Idnd 
of  cotton-plait,  with  feathers  different  from  those  on  the  one  mentioned,  to  wear  as 
a  hat,  ^  but  the  Hebu  said  he  had  none,  though  he  would  get  it  at  the  next  house. 
So  Komatari  went  to  the  next  house,  saw  the  Hebu  house-master,  asked  for  the  cotton- 
plait  for  the  hat,  and  in  the  same  manner  as  before,  this  Hebu  also  said  to  him:  "I 
have  a  name,  but  I  wiU  not  tell  it  to  you.  You  must  find  it  out  for  yourself  when  you 
are  a  medicine-man."  Komatari  went  home  now,  and  arranged  the  feathered  cotton 
on  top  of  the  calabash,  when  who  should  put  in  an  appearance  again  but  the  Irilling 
Hebu.  When  he  again  asked  Komatari  what  he  intended  doing  with  the  calabash, 
the  latter  refused  to  tell  him,  as  before.  But  Komatari  was  not  satisfied  even  now, 
because  when  he  shook  the  gourd  it  did  not  rattle.  As  yet  it  had  no  stones  in  it.  So 
Komatari  went  into  the  bush  again,  and  followed  creek  after  creek,  and  at  last  came  to 
a  big  river.  There  he  met  another  Hebu,  who  got  the  proper  stones  that  were  wanted. 
When  he  had  given  them  to  Komatari,  he  said,  like  the  others:   "I  have  a  name,  but 

I  The  timber  always  employed  (or  these  two  pmi>oses  has  a  milky  sap,  and  is  found  in  places  sach  as 
described,  that  is  in  the  forest,  along  the  bants  of  swiftly  flowing  creeks. 
*That  is,  the  headdress  with  the  cotton  "pompons"  worn  by  the  medicine-man  when  initiated. 
15961° — 30  ETH — 15 22 


338  ANIMISM  AND  FOLK-LOKE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS  [sth.  ann.  30 

I  will  not  tell  it  to  you.  You  must  find  it  out  for  youreelf  when  you  are  a  medicine- 
man." Komatari  again  made  Ms  way  home  and  put  the  stones  into  the  calabash. 
Just  as  he  was  finishing  the  work  the  killing  Hebu  again  appeared,  asking  him  as 
before,  what  he  intended  doing  with  the  calabash.  The  answer  was,  "This  is  to  kill 
you  with,  and  to  prevent  you  killing  other  people,"  and  as  Komatari  shook  the  cala- 
bash, which  was  now  a  finished  maraka  rattle,  the  Hebu  began  to  tremble  and  stagger, 
and  almost  fell,  but  he  managed  to  pick  himself  up  and  get  away  just  in  the  nick  of 
time.  He  ran  to  his  Aijamo  [head-man,  chief]  and  said:  "There  is  a  man  who  has 
an  object  with  which  he  nearly  kUled  me  and  I  must  get  my  payment  [i.  e.  my 
•revenge].  I  am  going  back  to  kill  him."  "All  right!"  said  the  Aijamo,  "I  will  go 
with  you."  So  they  went  together,  and  brought  sickness  to  a  friend  and  neighbor  of 
Komatari's;  for  they  were  afraid  of  attacking  Komatari  himself.  However,  his  sick 
friend  sent  for  him.  Komatari  went,  and  played  the  maraka  on  him,  and  took  out 
his  sickness.  So  the  killing  Hebu  made  another  man  ill,  but  Komatari  took  the 
disease  out  of  him  also.  The  Hebu  next  afflicted  a  third  victim,  and  again  Komatari 
was  victorious.  But  when  he  attacked  a  fourth  one,  Komatari  was  out  hunting. 
When  he  returned,  the  poor  fellow  was  in  a  bad  enough  condition:  so  strong  did  the 
sickness  come,  that  Komatari  could  not  cure  him — he  had  "stood  too  long."  The 
killing  Hebu  then  explained  to  Komatari  that  it  would  always  be  thus:  some  patients 
he  (Komatari)  could  save,  and  other  patients  he  could  not.  Of  course  Komatari  had 
been  able  to  find  out  the  names  of  all  the  Hebus  that  had  lent  him  assistance  in  the 
manufacture  of  his  maraka,  and  it  is  to  these  different  Hebus  whom  the  present-day 
medicine-men  are  said  to  "sing"  and  call  on  when  they  cure  the  sick.  For  instance, 
the  name  of  the  Hebu  that  procured  the  tobacco  seeds  for  Komatari  was  Wau-uno 
[=Arawak  Anura],  "the  white  crane." 

397.  Tlie  apprenticeship  of  tlie  medicine-man  in  the  olden  days  was 
very  far  from  being  the  proverbial  bed  of  roses.  Among  other  tests, 
he  had  for  many  months  to  practise  self-denial,  and  submit  under 
a  stinted  diet  to  the  prohibition  of  what  were  to  him  accustomed 
luxuries.  He  had  to  satisfy  his  teacher  in  his  knowledge  of  the 
instincts  and  habits  of  animals,  in  the  properties  of  plants,  and  the 
seasons  for  flowering  and  bearing,  for  the  piai  man  was  often  con- 
sulted as  to  when  and  where  game  was  to  be  found,  and  he  was  more 
than  often  correct  in  his  surmises.  He  also  had  to  know  of  the 
grouping  of  the  stars  into  constellations,  and  the  legends  connected 
not  only  with  them,  but  with  his  own  tribe.  He  had  likewise  to  be 
conversant  with  the  media  for  the  invocation  of  the  Spirits,  as  chants 
and  recitatives,  and  also  to  be  able  to  imitate  animal  and  human 
voices.  He  had  to  submit  to  a  chance  of  death  by  drinking  a  decoc- 
tion of  tobacco  in  repeated  and  increasing  doses,  and  to  have  his  eyes 
washed  with  the  infusion  of  hiari  leaves  (Sect.  169);  he  slowly 
recovered,  with  a  confused  mind,  believing  that  in  his  trance,  the 
effect  of  narcotics  and  a  distempered  mind,  he  was  admitted  into  the 
company  of  the  Spirits,  that  he  conversed  with  them,  and  was  by  them- 
selves consecrated  to  the  office  of  piai  priest-doctor  (Da,  285). 
Bancroft  (316)  says  that  the  novitiate  "is  dosed  with  the  juice 
of  tobacco  till  it  no  longer  operates  as  an  emetic."  Sometimes,  as 
among  the  Oyambis  on  the  Oyapock  River  in  French  Guiana,  other 
things  were  mixed  with  the  tobacco,  for  example,   a  plant  called 


BOTH]  THE   MEDICINE-MAN  339 

quinquiva,  as  well  as  certain  of  the  drippings  from  an  exposed  dead 
body  (Cr,  158).  For  the  same  colony  Fathers  Grillet  and  Bechamel 
(GB,  48)  record  that  the  medicine-men  proffer  neither  physic  nor 
divination  "till  they  have  made  divers  experiments,  one  of  which 
is  so  dangerous  that  it  often  makes  them  burst.  They  stamp  the 
green  leaves  of  tobacco  and  squeeze  out  the  juice  of  it,  of  which  they 
drink  the  quantity  of  a  large  glassfxil,*etc.;  so  that  none  but  those 
who  are  of  a  very  robust  constitution,  who  try  this  practice  upon 
themselves,  escape  with  their  lives."  Brett  (Br,  362)  also  testifies 
to  the  severity  of  the  ordeal,  for  after  the  novice  has  been  reduced  to 
the  deathlike  state  of  sickness  to  which  the  fasting  coupled  with  the 
drinking  of  tobacco-water  has  brought  him — 

HiB  death  is  loudly  proclaimed,  and  his  countrymen  called  to  witness  his  state. 
Recovery  is  slow,  and  about  the  tenth  day  he  comes  forth  from  the  sacred  hut  in  a 
most  emaciated  condition.  For  ten  months  after  the  new  sorcerer  must  abstain  from 
the  flesh  of  birds  and  beasts,  and  only  the  smallest  kinds  of  fish  are  allowed  him.  Even 
cassava  bread  is  to  be  eaten  sparingly,  and  intoxicating  drinks  avoided  during  that 
period.  Meats  and  food  not  indigenous  to  the  country  are  especially  tabooed.  .  .  . 
McClintock  states  that  the  "above  rules  are  common  to  the  Caribe  aa  well  as  the 
Waraus,  but  that  the  former  are  allowed  during  their  period  of  abstinence  to  take 
a  little  meat — the  flesh  of  the  Acouri.  .  .  .  The  Akawoios  differ  in  some  respects  from 
the  othertribes,  inasmuch  as  not  less  than  four,  and  frequently  more,  become  M.  D.'s 
at  the  same  time." 

Gumilla  (ii,  25),  on  the  Orinoco  speaks  of  the  apprenticeship  of  the 
Piache  in  the  following  terms: 

In  the  forest  of  Casiabo,  there  was  a  medicine-man  named  Tulujay,  so  celebrated 
that  Indians  flocked  to  him  from  all  quarters,  but  they  did  not  all  come  to  learn,  nor 
subject  themselves  to  his  teaching,  because  this  cost  them  very  dear.  For  besides 
adequate  payment,  he  imposes  such  a  rigorous  40-day  fast  on  them,  that  few  dare  to 
undertake  it:  of  those  that  do,  the  majority  leave  the  Master  weakened  with  the  fast- 
ing: he  who  completes  it  is  made  to  swallow,  without  chewing,  three  pills,  manufac- 
tured of  different  herbs,  of  the  size  of  a  cherry-stone.  These  pills  are  said  to  be  an 
antidote  for  every  kind  of  poison,  and  so  render  the  disciple  secure  from  all  his  rivals 
and  enemies.  The  credulity  of  the  Indians  is  so  simple  that  none  of  them  will  med- 
dle with  any  individuals  so  treated  (curados). 

Most  of  the  above  accounts  are  concerned  mainly  with  the  drinking 
of  the  tobacco,  an  ordeal  to  which  the  old-time  missionaries  and 
travelers  seem  chiefly  to  have  devoted  their  attention.  Though  it 
would  have  been  of  cotu^e  more  or  less  practised  beforehand,  the 
tobacco  ordeal  in  its  entirety  was  reserved  for  the  grand  day  when 
the  public  installation  took  place.  During  his  coiu^e  of  training,  in 
addition  to  his  other  instruction,  the  apprentice  was  taught  to  suffer 
the  pangs  of  hunger  and  thirst,  and  to  experience  the  martyrdom  of 
pain  without  complaint  or  murmur.  To  teach  him  the  latter,  he 
was  either  bitten  with  ants  or  cut  on  various  portions  of  the  body. 
Among  the  Islanders  "his  body  is  scraped  with  acotu-i  teeth"  (BBR, 
236).     The  ants  were  fixed  into  the  interstices  of  plaited  diamond- 


340  ANIMISM   AND  FOLK-LOEE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS   [eth.  ann.  30 

shaped  mats  or  girdles  and  these  were  held  or  tied  on  the  neck,  breast, 
stomach,  or  legs  (WJ,  91).  In  some  cases,  during  their  period  of 
probationership,  the  prospective  medicine-men  must  not  come  into 
contact  with  Europeans,  as  this  would  destroy  forever  their  influence 
over  the  spirit  world  (ScR,  i,  423).  West  of  the  Orinoco,  "they  sub- 
mitted to  a  seclusion  of  two  years  in  caverns,  situated  in  the  deepest 
recesses  of  the  forests.  During  this  period  they  ate  no  animal  food; 
they  saw  no  person,  not  even  their  parents.  The  old  Piaches  or 
doctors  went  and  instructed  them  during  the  night"  (FD,  50). 
Magic  stones  are  alleged  to  be  placed  in  the  novitiate's  head  (KG, 
II,  154).  Cr6vaux,  among  the  Roucouyeimes  of  the  Yary  River, 
French  Guiana,  speaks  of  the  "many  years  of  probationership"  (Cr, 
117).  "Takes  some  years:  the  novice  returns  more  like  a  skeleton 
than  a  man -among  his  people"  (ScR,  i,  423—4).  The  only  account 
of  a  public  installation  of  the  would-be  piai,  actually  described  as 
such,  comes  from  Cayenne: 

At  the  public  installation  to  which  the  neighboring  piais  are  invited,  the  aspirant 
has  to  swallow  at  one  draught  a  calabash  containing  about  two  pints  of  tobacco-juice. 
Most  often  he  falls  into  a  swoon,  whereupon  he  is  carried  to  his  hammock:  if  he  does 
not  vomit  directly  after  taking  this  powerful  emetic,  he  dies,  or  at  least  he  is  seized 
with  horrible  convidsions  and  breaks  out  into  cold  sweats,  etc.,  which  all  tend  to 
bring  him  to  the  grave.    But  if  he  sm^ves,  he  is  acclaimed  Piai.     [PBa,  211.] 

In  the  Island  practices,  the  novitiate  is  made  to  drink  tobacco- 
juice  until  he  faints,  and,  when  they  say  that  his  Spirit  has  gone  to 
the  Chemeen,  they  rub  his  body  with  gum,  and  cover  it  with  feathers 
to  allow  him  to  fly  to  the  Chemeen  (BBR,  235).  Among  the  Pom- 
eroon  District  Arawaks  and  Warraus  it  would  seem  that  the  aspirant 
wore  a  special  cotton  headdress  at  the  time  of  installation.  Pitou 
mentions  the  piai  installation  as  taking  place  on  the  night  before  the 
marriages  (LAP,  ii,  266). 

298.  Mention  has  already  been  made  (Sect.  297)  of  the  knowledge, 
of  which  the  medicine-man  had  to  give  proof,  concerning  the  instincts, 
habits,  etc.,  of  animals.  Seated  on  his  professional  stool,  with 
maraka  in  hand,  he  might  be  observed  studying  where  game  is  to  be 
foimd  by  the  morrow's  daybreak.  He  lights  up  his  fire,  and  igniting 
some  tobacco,  he  invites  by  invocation  the  spirits  of  the  game  he 
desires  (Sect.  116).  In  his  enthusiasm  he  speaks  to.them  and  answers 
for  them  in  their  supposed  peculiar  tones,  modulated  as  in  ventriloquy; 
for  he  believes  that,  being  possessed,  they  answer  through  him,  he 
being  at  the  same  time  the  humble  earnest  inquirer  and  the  sufficient 
answerer  of  his  own  inquiries  (Da,  287).  This  belief  in  the  inter- 
dependence of  the  priesthood  and  animal  life  is  well  illustrated  in  an 
example  (Ti,  ii,  1883,  p.  348)  given  by  McClintock:  "I  had  an 
Accawoi  huntsman  who  was  a  sorcerer  (peaiman)  and  considered  that 
he  had  certain  birds  and  animals  so  completely  under  his  control  that 


BOTH]  THE   MEDICINE-MAN  341 

no  inducement  would  have  tempted  Viitti  to  kill  axiy  of  them;  among 
them  were  powis  .  .  .  maroodies,  and  the  Axua  tiger.  .  .  .  The 
latter  he  always  told  he  could  put  his  hand  upon  any  time  he  went  out." 
Another  apt  illustration  is  furnished  by  Schomburgk:  "In  our 
peregrinations  in  the  savannahs  we  frequently  met  with  the  nests  of 
wild  bees.  They  belonged  to  a  species  which  the  Makusi  Indians 
called  wampang;  the  Wapisiana  camuiba.  The  hives  or  nests  are 
generally  fixed  to  branches  of  trees,  and  are  from  2  to  3  feet  in 
length.  ...  It  stings  severely;  and  in  order  to  secure  nests,  the 
Indians  kindle  fires  under  them,  when  the  insects  abandon  their  fabrics 
en  masse.  I  have,  however,  seen  an  Indian  who  was  the  conjurer  or 
piaiman  of  his  tribe,  merely  approach  the  nest,  and  knocking  with 
his  fingers  against  it,  drive  out  all  the  bees  without  a  single  one 
injuring  him.  I  noticed  him  drawing  his  fingers  under  the  pits  of 
his  arms  before  he  knocked  against  the  hive"  (ScT,  40).  The  piai 
system  made  a  secret  art  of  hunting;  from  the  priest-doctor  the 
himters  learned  to  hunt  for  the  particular  game  they  required,  and 
received  at  his  hands  charms — maklar  and  hina — to  insure  their 
success  (Da,  251).  Among  the  Indians  of  the  Uaupes  River,  the 
piais  are  believed  to  have  power  to  destroy  dogs  or  game  and  to 
make  the  fish  leave  a  river  (ARW,  347).  The  medicine-man  further- 
more coiold  transform  himself  into  an  animal  (Sect.  154)  >  if  1^  wife 
becomes  pregnant  she  may  bear  him  a  tiger,  an  animal  into  which 
he  himself  may  be  transformed  at  death  (KG,  ii,  154). 

299.  Certainly  among  many  of  the  tribes  the  "doctors"  were  believed 
to  be  endowed  with  such  power  over  their  own  spirits  as  to  render 
themselves  invisible.  At  a  Makusi  village  on  the  Karakarang  River, 
a  branch  of  the  Cotinga,  Barrington  Brown  (Bro,  119)  was  told  that 
many  of  their  people  had  gone  to  Roraima  to  see  an  Indian  sorcerer 
there  who  had  the  power  of  making  himseK  invisible  at  will.  At  Mora 
village,  on  the  upper  Rupununi,  the  same  traveler  (Bro,  139)  explains 
how  the  piai's  absence  for  the  night  was  unavoidable,  owing  to  his 
having  to  go  up  among  the  mountains  to  roam  about  for  the  night, 
while  his  good  spirit  remained  in  one  of  the  houses  to  cure  a  sick  man. 

Not  only  could  the  medicine-man  invoke  Spirits  generally,  as  well 
as  those  of  particular  birds  and  beasts,  but  he  could  also  play  tricks 
with  his  own  and  other  Indians'  Spirits.  Thus,  im  Thurn  (339) : 
"He  is  able  to  call  to  him  and  question  the  spirit  of  any  sleeping 
Indian  of  his  own  tribe,  so  that  if  an  Indian  wishes  to  know  what  an 
absent  friend  is  doing,  he  has  only  to  employ  the  piai-man  to  summon 
and  question  the  spirit  of  the  far-away  Indian.  Or  the  piai-man  may 
send  his  own  spirit,  his  body  remaining  present,  to  get  the  required 
information." 

300.  The  piai's  reputation  as  an  interpreter  of  dreams  was  second  to 
none:  he  was  both  dreamer  and  seer  (Sect.  298),  but  this  is  only  what 


342  ANIMISM   AND  FOLK-LOEE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS   [dth.  ANN.  30 

might  have  been  expected,  considering  the  powers  he  possessed  over 
other  people's  Spirits  (Sect.  299),  and  dreams  are  really  but  people's 
Spirits  (Sect.  86). 

Saved  by  a  Dream  (W)* 

A  certain  man  had  two  wives,  but  unfortunately  they  did  not  agree,  the  elder  being 
jealous  of  the  younger.  At  last  there  was  so  much  contention,  that  the  husband  was 
obliged  to  send  the  younger  one  away,  and  she  took  her  baby  with  her.  He  had  no 
bad  mind  toward  her,  but  he  could  not  stand  the  continual  quarreling.  When  taking 
her  departure,  he  gave  her  a  sharp  knife  with  which  to  protect  herself  on  the  road. 
The  poor  woman  wandered  on  imtil  nightfall,  when  she  came  upon  a  fine  ite  [Mauritia] 
palm;  cutting  a  forked  stick,  sheplanted  it  against  the  tree,  and  climbed  on  it.  Takiug 
the  youngest  aa-yet-imopened  leaf,  she  spread  it  out  and  made  a  sort  of  tempoiajy 
basket  of  it,  into  which  she  coiled  herself  together  with  her  baby,  and  there  she  tried 
to  sleep.  Now,  upon  this  particular  palm,  the  fruit  was  plentiful — some  seven  or 
eight  bunches — and  around  the  stalk  of  each  bunch  she  had  taken  the  precaution  of 
cutting  a  little  ring,  so  that  with  the  slightest  touch,  any  bunch  would- fall  to  the 
ground.  Somehow  or  other,  the  unhappy  mother  could  not  sleep,  and  late  in  the 
night  she  heard  the  growling  of  the  tigers  who  had  been  attracted  by  her  scent.  One 
of  these  brutes  climbed  the  palm  and  jxmiped  on  one  of  the  fruits,  but  no  sooner  had 
he  touched  it  than  it  gave  way  and  he  fell  with  a  crash  into  the  very  midst  of  hia 
fellows  below  who,  believing  him  to  be  the  woman  they  were  in  search  of,  promptly 
tore  him  to  pieces.  Another  tiger  made  a  similar  attempt,  climbed  the  tree,  jumped 
on  the  fruit,  and  ended  in  the  same  disastrous  manner.  And  so  with  a  third,  fourth, 
fifth,  and  sixth  tiger — all  were  similarly  destroyed.  By  this  time  the  dawn  had  broken, 
and  the  carcasses  Were  left  rotting  at  the  bottom  of  the  tree.  What  a  sight  for  the  terrified 
mother  nestling  up  above!  She  could  see  all  the  tigers  lying  still  and  quiet,  but  was 
afraid  to  come  down  lest  they  might  still  be  alive.  She  therefore  waited  a  little  and 
when,  after  the  rising  of  the  sun,  she  recognized  a  wasp  settling  on  each  of  their  pro- 
truded tongues,  she  knew  that  the  tigers  must  all  be  dead  and  could  now  do  her  no 
harm.  As  soon  as  she  got  down  she  continued  her  journey,  and  wandering  along  all 
day,  she  arrived  about  nightfall  at  a  big  manicole  tree,  which  she  climbed,  with  the 
baby  fastened  on  her  back.  Tigers  were  likewise  very  prevalent  here,  and  scenting 
her  presence,  they  started  digging  around  the  roots  with  the  result  that  by  and  by, 
the  tree  fell  with  a  crash,  but  fortunately  into  an  immense  spider-web,  where  its  living 
freight  became  stuck.  Now  the  woman's  father  was  a  celebrated  piai,  and  while  the 
first  night's  occurrences  were  taking  place,  he  was  dreaming  all  about  her  and  the 
tigers.  Next  morning  he  started  to  search  and  came  upon  her  while  resting  in  the 
spider-web.  It  was  owing  to  the  baby  making  water  that  he  had  cause  to  look  up 
ajid  discover  his  daughter.  By  daylight  he  had  shot  the  tigers  that  were  prowling 
around,  and  then  helped  down  the  woman  and  his  grandchild.  Both  daughter  and 
father  cried;  the  former  had  been  so  strongly  punished,  the  latter  was  so  glad  to  have 
her  home  again. 

301.  Among  other  duties  that  the  medicine-men  might  be  called 
on  to  perform  was  to  fix  the  time  most  propitious  for  the  people  to 
attack  their  enemies  (HWJtJ,  244).  They  were  supposed  to  be  gifted 
with  the  power  of  prophecy:  they  foretold  the  issue  of  battles  (BBR, 
234),  whether  there  would  be  war  or  peace;  similarly,  they  could 
prophesy  as  to  the  crops — whether  these  would  prove  scanty  or 
abundant  (FD,  51). 

'  For  anotber  Warrau  Tersion  of  this  story,  see  Sect.  1S6A . 


BOTH]  THE   MEDICIKE-MAW  343 

302.  The  Pomeroon  Arawaks  appear  to  credit  the  piai  with  being 
able  to  influence  the  Yawahus  in  bringing  the  as-yet-Tmbom  babes  to 
the  mothers  (Sect.  28^).  In  some  districts,  as  on  the  Berbice,  the 
piais  were  said  to  be  professional  poisoners,  but  it  must  be  remem- 
bered that  the  charge  of  poisoning  was  one  made  against  all  Ara- 
waks  as  a  habit  (Da,  16).  Among  the  wurali-poison-making  tribes, 
for  example,  the  Makusis,  Bemau's  statement  (Be,  36)  that  the 
"conjurers  alone  are  conversant  with  the  art  of  compounding  it" 
does  not  seem  to  be  borne  out  by  the  facts.  At  one  place  on  the 
Orinoco,  as  already  stated  (Sect.  297),  the  sorcerers  were  alleged  to 
be  rendered  poison-proof  (G,  n,  25).  Waterton's  statement  (W,  223) 
that  "he  is  an  enchanter:  he  finds  out  things  lost"  is  only  a  fiurther 
example  of  the  piai's  supposed  versatility.  I  remember  on  one 
occasion  unconscioiisly  giving  great  offence  to  my  old  doctor-friend, 
Bariki,  now  alas!  gone  to  his  long,  last  rest,  by  asking  him  ■!/ he  knew 
so-and-so:  he  gave  me  a  withering  glance,  and  after  a  few  moments, 
silence,  said,  "I  know  all  things."  Taking  the  hint,  I  subsequently 
invariably  sought  information  from  him  by  putting  my  question  in 
the  form  of  "Tell  me  this,  or  that,"  with  the  result  that,  pleased 
with  my  appreciation  of  his  mental  superiority,  he  was  always  ready 
to  impart  all  he  knew,  and  perhaps  more. 

303.  The  following  legend  is  another  good  example  showing  that 
there  was  very  little  that  the  medicine-man  could  not  do  in  the 
natural  or  supernatvu-al  sphere:  it  is  apparently  a  variant  of  the 
stories  given  in  Sects.  137  and  IJ^^. 

The  Medicine-man  and  the  Carriox  Ckows  (A) 

MakanauTO  ■was  a  very  clever  medicine-man;  we  call  such  an  one  a  semi-chichi. 
Setting  his  traps  out  in  the  bush,  he  was  always  certain  of  catching  something,  be  it 
bird  or  beast.  But  for  some  little  time  he  found  to  his  annoyance  on  going  to  his 
trap,  that  some  one  had  forestalled  him  and  had  stolen  the  meat  inside.  It  puzzled 
him  how  this  could  have  been  done,  because  there  were  no  footprints  or  broken 
bushes  about,  to  show  the  advent  or  departure  of  any  stranger.  So  he  one  day  climbed 
a  tree  in  close  proximity  to  one  of  his  traps,  and  watched  from  his  elevated  position. 
He  saw  some  game  caught  in  the  trap  and  by  and  by  a  black  Carrion-crow  [Caihartes 
hurroviamis]  came  swooping  down,  and  try  to  cut  it  up  with  a  knife,  so  as  to  remove 
it  the  easier.  The  Crow's  knife,  however,  was  too  blunt,  so  he  flew  away  and  fetched 
the  Vulture  [SarcoTham.'phus  j>apa\,  who  brought  a  sharper  knife  with  him,  and  cut 
up  aU  the  meat  nicely.  And  then  a  lot  more  Carrion-crows  came  down,  and  between 
them  they  cleared  every  particle  of  the  meat  away,  leaving  the  trap  as  empty  as 
before.  Makanauro  watched  all  this  quietly  from  under  cover  of  the  tree  branches, 
and  on  several  other  occasions  subsequently  saw  them  play  him  the  same  trick,  the 
Vulture  being  invariably  the  ringleader.  He  made  up  his  mind  to  catch  this  bird, 
and  di^:uising  himself  with  cotton,  which  he  stuck  all  over  him,  including  eyes, 
nose,  and  head,  he  laid  himself  down  on  the  ground  quite  close  to  one  of  his  traps 
that  had  game  in  it,  and  remained  perfectly  still.  As  usual,  the  Crow  came  down  first, 
but  his  knife  was  still  too  blunt  to  cut  up  either  Makanauro  or  the  meat  inside  the 


344  ANIMISM   AND  FOLK-LORE   OF   GXHANA  INDIANS    [hth.  ANN.  30 

trap,  and  so  he  went,  as  before,  to  fetch  the  Vulture.  And  when  the  Vulture  came 
quite  close,  Makanauro  seized  him,  and  held  him  fast;  this  made  all  the  other  com- 
mon Crows  frightened  and  they  flew  away.  The  bird  himself  thought  that  his  captor 
must  be  a  piai,  because  no  one  else  could  have  secured  him  so  simply.  Now,  I  have 
made  a  mistake  talking  about  "himself,"  "his,"  and  "him,"  because  it  was  a  hen- 
bird,  as  Makanauro  speedily  found  out.  Indeed,  she  was  a  very  fine  woman,  and 
he  married  her  there  and  then.  And  thus  they  lived  comfortably  together  for  many 
years,  all  the  Carrion-crows  having  returned  to  live  in  the  vicinity  as  friends  and 
companions.  One  day,  the  wife  sent  him  for  some  water,  and  gave  him  a  quake  to 
bring  it  in.  He  took  it  down  to  the  riverside,  but  couldn't  "catch"  any,  of  course, 
because  as  fast  as  he  poured  it  in,  it  flowed  out  through  the  meshwork.  He  tried 
several  times,  until  at  last  some  "muneri  ants,  noticing  his  extraordinary  movements, 
asked  him  what  he  was  trying  to  do,  and  when  they  learnt  how  anxious  he  was  to 
oblige  his  wife,  they  offered  to  patch  up  all  the  interstices  of  the  basket  with  ' '  ant-bed. ' ' 
When  they  had  finished  the  job,  the  quake  retained  the  water,  and  Makanauro  brought 
it  home  full  up  to  the  brim.  On  seeing  this,  his  wife  said  to  herself,  "Yes,  indeed. 
My  husband  must  be  a  real  semi-chichi  to  be  able  to  bring  water  in  a  quake  for  me." 
And  yet  she  had  her  doubts  about  the  matter,  so  she  thought  she  would  try  him  a  second 
time.  She  accordingly  sent  him  to  cut  a  field  for  her,  but  on  returning  each  morning 
he  found  that  all  the  timber  and  bushes  that  he  had  cut  down  the  day  before  were 
growing  again  and  thriving  in  their  original  positions.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  Carrion- 
crows  had  flown  to  the  field  each  night,  at  the  bidding  of  the  Vulture,  and  set 
up  again  the  trees  and  bushes  that  had  been  felled.  But  poor  Makanauro  did  not 
know  this.  All  he  could  do  was  to  ask  the  kushi  ants  to  eat  up  the  wood,  branches 
and  leaves,  as  fast  as  he  could  cut  them  down;  these,  knowing  the  facts  of  the  case, 
made  up  their  minds  to  help  him,  and  did  so.  The  Carrion-crows  could  not  fight 
against  the  kushi  ants,  and  so  Makanauro  managed  to  complete  the  clearing  of 
his  field.  And  though  his  wife  was  inclined  at  heart  still  more  to  believe  that  her 
husband  was  a  medicine-man,  considering  the  circumstances  under  which,  as  she 
believed,  he  had  cut  his  field,  she  was  yet  in  doubt  about  it,  and  determined  to  try 
him  a  third  time.  She  therefore  sent  him  to  make  a  chair-bench  for  her  mother-in- 
law;  he  had  to  carve  the  head  at  each  extremity  into  the  exact  likeness  of  the  old 
woman.  This  task  she  thought  was  practically  impossible; '  and  Makanauro  thought 
Bo,  too,  because  as  yet  he  had  never  set  eyes  on  his  mother-in-law.  However,  he 
tried  to  find  out,  but  every  time  he  even  looked  in  the  direction  of  the  old  woman, 
she  immediately  covered  her  face  with  her  hand,  or  turned  it  aside,  or  downward. 
How  to  make  her  turn  her  face  upward  so  as  to  get  a  good  look  at  it,  was  what 
puzzled  him.  At  last  he  hit  upon  an  idea.  Without  her  knowing  it,  he  climbed 
into  the  roof,  and  throwing  down  a  centipede  so  as  to  fall  "flop"  into  her  lap, 
made  her  extend  her  arms  and  look  up  for  a  second,  just  as  he  wanted.  Then 
starting  to  work,  he  cut  up  the  log,  trimmed  it  into  the  necessary  shape,  and 
finally  carved  excellent  likenesses  on  the  two  heads.  When  completed,  his  wife 
took  the  bench  to  her  mother-in-law,  who  laughed  when  she  saw  her  two  por- 
traits; certain  it  is,  that  both  women  wondered  greatly  how  Makanauro  had  managed 
to  obtain  a  sufficiently  good  view  to  enable  him  to  make  so  exact  a  likeness. 
The  wife  now  became  quite  proud  of  her  husband,  and  fond  of  him,  too,  because  he 
always  carried  out  her  wishes.  If  she  asked  him  to  bring  her  some  fish,  he  would 
fetch  her  some  wrapped  up  in  a  small  parcel:  and  when  as  usual  she  would  pout  her 
lips  and  hint  that  it  was  not  a  large  quantity,  he  would  tell  her  to  open  it,  and  then 
the  fish  would  come  tumbling  out,  one  after  the  other,  in  immense  quantities,  filling 
the  whole  house  [cf.  Sect.  2S].  And  he  would  laugh,  because  being  a  piai,  he 
could  do  extraordinary  things.    A  fine  boy  had  long  blessed  their  union,  and  the 

1  Before  contact  with  European  inBuences,  it  was  strictly  taboo  for  any  Indian  eitlier  to  enter  his  mother- 
in-law's  apartment,  to  remain  in  the  same  room,  to  talk  with  her,  or  even  to  look  at  her. 


BOTH]  THE   MEDICINE-MAX  345 

mother  was  beginning  to  feel  homesick:  anxious  to  show  ofi  her  husband  and  child 
to  her  own  people,  she  told  him  that  they  must  all  leave  his  place,  and  go  to  her 
father's,  up  and  beyond  the  clouds.  And  there  they  remained  with  her  relations, 
the  Carrion-crows,  for  many  a  long  day.  She,  however,  was  always  telling  her  folk 
what  a  clever  man  her  husband  was,  and  that  whatever  she  asked  liim  to  do,  do  it 
he  did.  So  these  Crows  asked  him  to  perform  a  number  of  seemingly  impossible 
feats,  and  not  one  did  he  fail  in  executing.  But  this  only  made  all  the  Crows  jealous 
of  him,  and  they  determined  to  put  him  to  death.  Makanauxo,  being  a  mediciue- 
man,  however,  knew  that  they  proposed  doing  so,  and  said,  "All  right.  Let  me  get 
back  to  my  place,  and  fetch  my  friends,  and  we  will  fight  it  out."  So,  taking  his 
wife  and  son,  he  returned  to  his  old  home,  and  collecting  all  the  birds  in  the  neighbor- 
hood, he  told  them  to  prepare  for  the  onslaught  with  the  Carrion-crows.  Now,  when 
these  arrived  and  saw  the  hosts  of  other  birds  ready  to  receive  them,  they  determined 
to  secure  by  stratagem  a  victory  which  they  rect^jiized  they  could  not  obtain  by 
force.  Their  idea  was  to  bum  up  the  whole  world,  together  with  Makanauro  and 
his  friends  in  it.  For  this  purpose,  the  Crows  started  fires  here,  there,  and  every- 
where around,  but  Makanauro  saw  his  friend  the  black  kurri-kurri  [Harpiprion 
cayennensis]  flying  high,  and  told  all  his  other  friends  to  curse  her,  he  joining  in  their 
imprecations.  This  made  the  rain  fall,  and  so  the  fires  were  extinguished.'  Now 
that  his  wife  became  angered  with  him  for  having  frustrated  her  own  people, 
the  Crows,  in  their  design  of  burning  up  the  world  in  general,  Makanauro  left  her  and 
went  his  way.  She  then  sent  her  son  to  waylay  and  kill  him,  but  whether  he  effected 
this  wicked  design  I  do  not  know.' 

304.  In  some  cases  the  piais  were  recognized  to  a  greater  or  less 
extent  as  the  guardians  of  the  tribal  traditions.  Thus  in  the  "Archi- 
T03  de  Indias;  Patronato.  Rodrigo  de  Navarrete:  An  account  of 
the  Provinces  and  Nations  of  the  Aruacas"  [Arawaks],  written  some 
time  during  the  last  quarter  of  the  sixteenth  century,  a  work  quoted 
by  Rodway,  in  Timehri  (for  1895,  p.  10),  there  is  the  following  inter- 
esting reference: 

These  Indians  have  a  meeting-place  or  school  where  they  assemble,  as  in  a  manner 
for  preaching.  There  are  among  them  old  and  wise  men  whom  they  call  Cemetu 
[compare  the  usual  form  Cemi,  Semi,  etc..  Sect.  9S]]  these  assemble  in  the  houses 
designed  for  their  meetings  and  there  these  old  men  recount  the  traditions  and  exploits 
of  their  ancestors  and  great  men:  and  also  narrate  what  those  ancestors  heard  from 
their  forefathers;  so  that  in  this  manner  they  remember  the  most  ancient  events 
of  their  country  and  people.  And,  in  like  manner  they  recount  or  preach  about 
events  relating  to  the  heavens,  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars. 

305.  The  medicine-men  not  only  gave  names  to  the  children,  as 
with  the  Arawaks  (Sect.  864),  but  under  certain  circimistances  would 
change  them.  Thus,  among  this  same  nation,  if  a  piai  is  called  on 
to  treat  a  sick  child,  and  is  successful  in  effecting  a  cure,  he  may  give 
his  little  patient  a  new  name,  and  thus  enable  it  to  make  a  fresh  start 
in  life. 

306.  The  chief  business,  however,  of  these  doctors  is  centered  in 
counteracting  the  evil  designs  of  certain  Spirits,  Kanaima  or  other, 

1  The  belief  is  still  prevalent  among  the  Pomeroon  Arawaks  that  if  one  hears  the  black  kurri-kum 
"calling  "  in  early  morning,  and  thereupon  curses  the  bird,  rain  is  certain  to  fall  during  the  day  (Sect.  ttS). 

>  Compare  Makona-ura,  a  youth  famous  for  his  skill  as  a  fisher,  and  credited  with  invenWng  the  maswa, 
or  fish  basket-trap  (Da,  259). 


346  AinMISM  AND  FOLK-LOBE   OF   GtTIANA  INDIANS   [bth.ann.  30 

who  cause  disease  of  such  a  nature  as  to  baffle  the  ordinary  home 
treatment  and  household  remedies  of  the  average  Indian,  though  I 
know  of  one  instance  in  which  a  woman  in  labor  was  brought  by  her 
husband  to  seek  remedial  measures  from  one  of  this  fraternity.  The 
home  treatment  just  referred  to  might  consist  in  the  use  of  ordinary 
herbs,  vapor  baths,  and  in  other  measures  known  to  the  average 
Indian.  But  occasionally,  as  with  the  Dakinis,  to  obtain  such  an 
herbal  remedy,  the  piai's  assistance  may  have  to  be  invoked  (Sect. 
168B).  As  a  matter  of  fact,  all  disease  which  does  not  respond 
readily  to  treatment  is  ascribed  to  various  Spirits  acting  directly  or 
indirectly,  by  means  of  thorns,  pointed  bones,  etc.,  maliciously 
inserted  into  the  body  of  the  patient.  When  once  invoked,  the  medi- 
cine-man is  able  to  learn  the  cause  of  the  trouble,  and  how  to  combat 
its  effects. 

307.  Disease  or  death  is  not  a  "natural"  phenomenon,  so  to  speak, 
but  is  usually  due  to  one  of  two  agencies.  It  may  be  the  work 
of  some  Spirit,  perpetrated  either  judicially  or  of  mere  malice,  as 
some  affirm,  or  through  the  importunity  of  a  votary.  An  evil 
Spirit,  one  who  causes  an  evil,  might  send  an  animal  to  bite  or  sting 
a  person,  or  cause  a  tree  to  fall  upon  him,  his  ax  to  cut  him,  water  to 
drown  hbn,  or  some  other  calamity  (Da,  289).  Now,  except  through 
the  agency  of  the  piai,  the  influence  of  this  Spirit  causing  the  evil  can 
not  usually  be  counteracted.  Bennan  alone  for  the  Mainland  makes 
the  statement,  which  I  must  regard  as  confirmed  by  the  practice 
of  a  similar  custom  on  the  Islands,  that  "when  sickness  assails  them, 
they  [laymen.  Sect.  89]  present  a  propitiation  to  the  Evil  Spirit,  con- 
sisting of  a  piece  of  the  flesh  of  any  quadruped.  If  recovery  follows, 
they  suppose  the  Evil  Spirit  to  have  regarded  and  accepted  the  offer- 
ing," but  if  no  recovery,  the  conjurer  is  called  in,  etc.  (Be,  51-54).  The 
piais  are  undoubtedly  believed  to  have  the  power  of  influencing  the 
Spirits  not  only  in  removing  the  causes  of  the  disease  which  they  (the 
Spirits)  have  inflicted,  but  also  in  sending  sickness  elsewhere  (Sect.  319) . 
In  the.  spring  of  1907  the  Ojanas  (Cayenne)  suffered  from  an  epidemic 
of  bronchitis,  or  "galloping  consumption,"  from  which  many  died; 
this  was  ascribed  to  the  piais  (Go,  14) .  It  is  possible,  however,  that 
the  medicine-men,  independently  of  Spirits,  and  certain  old  people, 
can  inflict  sickness  on  folks  at  a  distance;  for  instance,  the  Apalai 
Indians  of  the  upper  Parou,  Cayenne,  when  they  can  not  subdue 
their  sicknesses  revenge  themselves  by  sending  an  evil  charm  to  a 
woman  (Sect.  319)  of  the  neighboring  tribe  (Cr,  299).  It  is  not  at 
all  uncommon  for  one  tribe  to  put  the  blame  of  some  real  or  imagined 
iU  on  the  shoulders  of  another.  For  example,  the  Wapisianas  con- 
sider the  Makusis  the  most  dangerous  poisoners  and  Kanaimas — 
every  ilbaess  is  ascribed  by  them  to  the  wickedness  of  the  Makusis 
(ScE,  II,  387).     Similarly,  on  the  Tiquie  River  (Rio  Negro)  theMakua 


BOTH]  THE   MEDICINE-MAN  347 

are  blamed  for  everything  (KG,  i,  270) .  There  is  a  certain  skin  disease, 
believed  to  be  a  vitiligo,  which  the  Piapocos  of  the  lower  Guaviar 
(Orinoco  River)  call  sero:  it  is  always  contracted  by  drinking  the 
yocrtto  (fiouac  mixed  with  water)  of  an  enemy  aflFected  with  this 
trouble,  who  has  mixed  in  the  brew  a  few  drops  of  his  blood  (Cr,  527). 
Death  and  other  evils  may  be  due  also  to  some  human  enemy  more 
or  less  disguised,  modified,  or  influenced  by  a  peculiarly  terrible  Spirit 
known  as  Kanaima,  against  whose  machinations  the  power  of  the 
piai  avails  nothing.  To  this  belief  in  Kanaima  I  propose  devoting  a 
separate  chapter  (Sect.  320). 

308.  In  the  Pomeroon  District,  the  present-day  Arawak  procedure 
of  the  piai,  for  the  treatment  of  disease,  is  as  follows :  Suppose  the 
patient  visits  the  "doctor,"  the  latter  will  sling  the  sufferer's  ham- 
mock in  the  special  out-house  already  mentioned.  In  those  cases 
in  which  the  person  is  too  ill  to  bear  removal,  the  doctor  will  visit 
him,  and  there  erect  a  closely  plaited  conical-shaped  cage  of  mani- 
cole  leaves,  with  a  low  door  only  just  large  enough  to  crawl  in  and 
out  by.  Nothing  further  can  be  done  now  until  the  sun  sets,  but 
as  soon  after  sundown  as  convenient  the  medicine-man  will  start 
a  new  fire,  by  twirling  one  stick  upon  another.  The  fire  once  kindled, 
he  rolls  tobacco  to  make  the  usual  Indian  cigarette,  and  proceeds  to 
examine  the  patient.  He  then  asks  what  the  pain  is  Uke,  and  where 
it  is — as,  in  stomach,  head,  chest, — and  talks  to  his  kickshaws,  especi- 
ally the  manikin,  or  doll,  to  learn  whether  the  patient  is  going  to 
be  cured.  The  method  of  employment  of  this  doll  has  already 
been  given  (Sect.  290).  Seated  on  his  special  chair,  the  doctor  next 
lights  and  smokes  his  cigarette,  and  finally  rubs  his  hands  with 
haiawa  wax.  This  done,  he  proceeds  to  massage  the  painful  spot, 
and  smokes  on  it  through  his  hands  placed  funnel-wise.  This  part 
of  the  treatment  may  be  viewed  by  the  pubUc,  there  being  nothing 
secret  or  mysterious  about  it,  and  may  of  itself  effect  a  cure,  in  which 
case,  as  the  Creoles  would  say,  "Story  done."  With  the  next  pro- 
cedure, however,  provided  the  iUness  prove  stubborn,  the  females  are 
all  sent  away  from  the  place,  men  have  to  keep  at  a  respectful  distance, 
quiet  must  reign,  and  all  fights  have  to  be  extinguished.  The  alleged 
reason  for  putting  out  the  fires  is  that  the  various  Spirits  whom  he  is 
now  about  to  invoke  may  not  be  afraid  to  come.  (If  the  treatment 
is  being  carried  out  at  the  patient's  residence,  the  medicine-man  will 
crawl  into  the  cage  when  the  invocation  takes  place.)  In  the  mean- 
time, the  medicine-man  cleans  and  polishes  his  maraka,  which  he 
pieces  together,  and  ties  the  feathers  carefidly  on,  smoking  on  it  aU 
the  while:  he  sings  and  shakes  his  rattle.  Leaving  his  bench,  he 
touches  the  painful  spot  or  spots  with  the  maraka,  circling  it  in  the 
air,  smoking  and  singing  all  the  while,  altering  his  voice  from  bass  to 
alto  and  vice-versa  according  to  the  voice  of  the  Spirit  which  is  pre- 


348  ANIMISM  AND  FOLK-LOEE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS   [eth.  ann.  30 

sumed  to  be  conversing  with  him.  Appaxently  two  voices  are  often 
heard.  "When  it  is  remembered  that  the  Spirit  may  be  anything 
from  a  tiger  to  a  powis,  even  another  piai,  the  various  modulations  of 
voice  and  speech  which  he  has  been  trained  to  reproduce  can  be  better 
imagined  than  described.  He  does  not  know  beforehand  which  one 
has  wrought  the  mischief;  hence  he  has  to  invoke  and  interrogate 
each  one.  This  manner  of  invocation,  according  to  the  fee  given, 
may  continue  until  two  or  three  in  the  morning — there  is  a  limit  to 
the  doctor's  powers  and  endurance — ^when  all  the  kickshaws  will 
be  put  away  in  the  specially  constructed  pegall.  Our  medicine-man, 
seated  on  his  divining  stool,  will  proceed  to  smoke  and  dream,  and 
in  his  dream  he  will  discover  at  whose  instigation  the  sickness  has 
been  sent,  and  whether  the  illness  itself  is  due  to  a  dead  person's 
Spirit  (as  a  Bush  Spirit) ,  to  a  living  one's  Spirit  (a  Kanaima),  or  to  the 
Oriyu,  or  Water  Spirit.  At  the  same  time  he  also  learns  the  mode  of 
cure.  Next  morning  he  will  retail  this  information  either  to  the 
patient  or  to  his  friends,  as  soon  as  he  is  paid  something  over  and 
above  the  fee  (as  cloth,  beads,  money),  which  he  has  already  received. 
The  cure  may  be  such  as  can  then  and  there  be  carried  out,  as  the 
extraction  of  the  evil  by  suction,  or  the  disease  may  prove  of  so 
serious  a  nature  that  it  is  a  matter  for  the  Spirits  alone  to  deal  with. 
At  any  rate  the  medicine-man  then  gives  careful  directions  as  to  how 
the  patient  and  his  relatives  are  to  be  fed — ^with  bird,  fish,  or  otherwise, 
as  the  case  may  be — but  there  is  always  the  stipulation  that  whatever 
is  ordered  (a)  must  never  be  added  to,  or  taken  away  from,  for 
example,  no  salt,  peppers,  seasoning,  etc.,  and  no  "trimming  off;" 
(6)  must  be  cooked  with  the  doctor's  own  fire,  or  with  another 
specially  made  for  the  purpose  by  means  of  two  pieces  of  stick,  care 
being  taken  in  both  cases  that  it  is  not  touched  by  a  stranger;  (c)  must 
not  be  allowed  to  boil  over  the  edge  of  the  pot.  If  during  the  course 
of  the  day  the  patient  should  not  improve,  the  doctor  will  repeat  the 
treatment  the  same  night — smoking,  singing,  and  dreaming — ^but  on 
this  occasion,  addressing  the  Spirit  which  has  caused  the  mischief, 
he  implores  it  if  possible  to  restore  the  health  which  it  has  impaired. 
He  may  even  repeat  all  this  the  third  night  if  the  patient's  grave 
condition  warrants  so  doing,  and  he  is  paid  an  adequate  fee.  At  any 
rate,  when  he  finally  completes  the  treatment  the  doctor  invariably 
tells  the  patient,  unless  the  latter  is  actually  moribund,  that  he  wiU 
recover,  but  that  both  he  and  his  family  must  be  very  careful  as  to 
the  foods  prescribed,  for  should  the  sufferer  unfortunately  die  it  is 
always  because  one  or  other  of  the  stipulations  regarding  diet  has 
not  been  properly  obeyed.  When,  during  the  course  of  the  treatment,  ' 
rain  happens  to  fall,  the  proceedings  are  immediately  postponed  to  the 
following  evening. 


BOTH]  THE   MEDICINE-MAN  349 

309.  Among  the  Pomeroon  Caribs  I  have  been  present  on  several 
occasions  on  the  Manawarin  River  at  the  procedure  adopted  by  a  piai 
to  aflfect  a  cure.  It  has  always  been  at  night,  with  the  doctor  seated  in 
a  small  temporary  cone-shaped  structure  roughly  made  of  manicole 
leaves,  and  the  rattle  brought  into  requisition.  Operations  invariably 
commenced  with  the  invocation  of  four  particular  Spirits  by  "sing- 
ing" to  them,  each  with  a  different  song,  by  tobacco  smoke,  and 
by  shaking  the  maraka.  As  a  matter  of  fact  the  medico  is  said  to 
caJl  up  only  the  first  Spirit;  the  latter,  however,  invokes  the  sec- 
ond, and  so  on.  The  names  of  these  four  Spirits,  in  the  order  in 
which  they  are  summoned,  are  Mawari  (Sect.  122),  Makai-ab&ni, 
lakai-a,  and  Aturar6ni.  All  except  the  second  live  somewhere  in  the 
bush,  but  they  come  when  summoned  by  the  rattie.  Makai-ab&ni, 
on  the  other  hand,  remains  in  the  maraka,  coming  out  only  when 
shaken,  and  then  he  envelops  himself  in  the  tobacco-smoke.  All 
these  four  are  good  Spirits  and  friends  of  the  piai;  they  are  male  and 
female,  like  people,  and  come  from  the  bodies  of  old-time  medicine- 
men; they  tell  the  celebrant  whether  the  disease  from  which  the  sick 
man  is  suffering  has  been  sent  by  another  Spirit  or  by  another  piai 
at  the  instigation  of  some  enemy.  The  three  evil  Spirits  who  send 
sickness,  Ul-luck,  and  other  calamities  to  mankind,  belong  to  Cloud- 
land,  and  to  Water;  Kwamaraka  hves  in  the  sky  below  the  clouds  and 
is  something  hke  a  "gaulding"  bird  (JPUerodius);  Tokoroi-mo  has  his 
home  below  the  clouds,  and  resembles  the  "doraquarra"  bird  {Odon- 
iophorus) ;  while  Oko-yiuno  is  the ' '  water-mamma' '  (Sect.  1 77) .  These 
three  have  a  master,  called  No-s6no,  who  hves  somewhere  above  the 
clouds ;  he  is  a  man,  a  very  bad  one,  is  always  for  killing  somebody,  and 
is  his  own  master.  But  to  return.  If  the  disease  has  been  sent  by  one 
or  other  of  these  bad  Spirits,  the  piai  gets  Mawari  to  take  it  far,  far 
away,  away  to  the  Orinoco  River;  but  if  by  another  piai,  the  present 
celebrant  will  send  it  back  to  him,  and  woe  betide  the  latter  if  he  is  not 
smart  enough  to  avoid  it,  for  unless  he  takes  very  great  care  he  is 
sure  to  die  from  it.  Should,  however,  the  sickness  prove  stubborn, 
"Tiger"  is  finally  called  on;  directiy  his  voice  is  heard  the  disease 
comes  out  to  be  speedily  devoured  by  him.  But  if  Tiger  should  prove 
unsuccessful,  nothing  now  can  possibly  save  the  patient. 

310.  The  Gahbi  piai  of  French  Guiana  practised  similar  methods, ' 
according  to  the  accounts  left  us  by  Barrere:  After  placing  the 
maraka  below  the  patient's  hammock,  the  piai  starts  sucking  at 
those  parts  of  the  sick  person's  body  where  the  pains  are  greatest, 
afterward  passing  both  hands  over  the  patient;  he  then  strikes  his 
hands  together  and  blows  on  each  palm  (Sect.  85)  so  as  to  drive 
away  the  "Devil"  [Spirit]  that  has  attached  itself  there  (Sect.  74)', 
the  piai  wiU  sometimes  pinch  up  pieces  of  his  own  skin,  and  thus 
extracting  corpulency  (embonpoint)  and  good  health,  will  apply 
these  in  handsful  to  the  patient  while  making  the  passes  over  him. 


350  ASriMISM   AND   FOLK-LOEE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS   [bth.  ann.  30 

These  Indians  also  employed  the  little  hut  specially  constructed  in 
the  Tcarbet,  in  which,  after  all  the  lights  have  been  extinguished,  the 
medicine-men  "sings"  and  shakes  the  rattle.  He  often  comes  out  of 
his  Httle  cabin  and  would  pretend  that  it  is  the  Devil  [Spirit]  that  has 
got  out.  He  will  then  run  right  round  the  Tcarbet  and  tug  at  the 
hammocks  in  which  the  Indians  are  lying.  He  sometimes  says  that 
he  is  going  up  into  the  skies,  but  will  soon  return,  and  he  wiU  then 
mimic  the  distant  voice,  etc.  (PBa,  213-215). 

311.  In  remote  parts  [of  French  Guiana]  and  toward  the  sources  of 
the  River  Oyapok,  the  Indians  [  ?  Oyampis]  practise  another  method, 
with  the  figure  of  a  Devil  [Spirit]  made  of  a  very  soft  and  resonant 
wood.  This  statue,  which  is  three  or  four  feet  high,  looks  frightful, 
with  its  long  tail  (queue)  and  big  claws  with  which  they  provide  it. 
They  call  it  Anaan-tanha  (literally,  Devil-figure).  After  having 
blown  on  the  sick  person,  the  piais  carry  the  statue  out  of  the  hut. 
There  they  talk  to  it,  and  thrash  it  unmercifully  with  sticks,  so  as  to 
force  the  Devil  [Spirit],  in  spite  of  itself,  to  leave  the  sick  person.  These 
exorcisms  are  carried  out  at  night,  after  the  fires  have  been  extin- 
guished (PBa,  216).  Very  interesting  in  this  connection  is  the  maize- 
straw  manikin,  found  by  Cr6vaux,  among  the  Apalai  Indians  of 
Cayenne  (Cr,  301),  which  may  have  been  employed  for  a  simiilar 
purpose;  it  represented  a  warrior  ready  to  let  fly  an  arrow,  fixed  on 
two  sticks  arranged  crosswise  like  a  gallows. 

312.  It  is  not  always  necessary,  however,  to  use  the  maraka,  it 
being  quite  possible  to  invoke  the  Spirits  with  a  couple  of  bundles 
of  leaves.  Thus,  Schomburgk  gives  the  following  account  of  a 
Makusi  performance  at  Nappi,  on  the  Canuku  Mountains: 

The  old  man  came  into  my  hut  with  two  bundles  of  leaves  in  his  hands,  and  with 
them  he  drove  out  the  other  occ  upanta .  He  then  put  out  al  1  the  fires,  sat  near  my  ham- 
mock on  the  ground,  which  he  whipped  with  the  bundles,  and  started  howling,  only 
now  and  again  broken  by  short  pauses.  After  this  had  gone  on  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour, 
I  recognized  a  second  voice  by  the  side  of  my  hammock,  and  question  and  answer  went 
on  between  the  two.  The  conversations  with  the  evil  spirits  are  unintelligible  even 
to  the  Indians:  it  was  next  morning  that  the  piai  took  care  to  make  them  aware  of  its 
contents.  After  the  double  conversation  was  finished,  the  magician  placed  himself 
at  the  head-end  of  my  hammock,  howled  close  to  my  forehead  and,  after  lighting  a 
cigar,  blew  strong  clouds  of  tobacco-smoke  into  my  face  which  almost  suffocated  me, 
and  pressed  the  bundle  of  leaves  (which  I  recognized  by  the  smell  as  tobacco  leaves) 
onto  my  forehead.  This  went  on  for  quite  half  an  hour  and  got  me  into  a  good  sweat: 
at  last  his  voice  failed  him,  and  he  left  the  hut.  He  did  not  use  the  maraka.  [ScR 
II,  145-146.]  ' 

313.  Westward  of  the  Guianas  a  particular  kind  of  wood  apparently 
played  the  same  r61e  as  the  rattle  or  the  leaf-bundle,  if  we  accept  the 
statement  of  Depons  in  his  description  of  the  Captain  Generalship  of 
Caracas: 

The  practice  of  these  professors  of  the  healing  art  consisted  in  licking  and  sucking 
the  affected  part,  in  order,  according  to  them,  to  eliminate  the  peccant  humour. 


BOTH]  THE   MEDICINE-MAN  351 

When  the  fever  or  pain  increased,  suction  of  the  joints,  as  well  as  friction  over  all  the 
body  with  the  hand,  was  employed.  During  the  performance  of  this  operation, 
some  unintelligible  words  were  pronounced,  with  a  loud  voice,  commanding  the  evil 
spirits  to  depart  out  of  the  patient's  body.  If  the  malady  did  not  readily  yield,  the 
Piache  or  physician  had  recourse  to  a  particular  kind  of  wood,  known  to  himself 
alone,  with  which  he  rubbed  the  breast,  throat,  and  mouth  of  the  patient;  a  practice 
which  seldom  foiled  to  produce  sickness  and  vomiting.  In  the  meantime  the  Piache 
on  his  side  uttered  dreadful  exclamations,  howled,  shook,  and  made  a  thousand  con- 
tortions with  his  body.  If  the  sick  person  recovered,  everything  contained  in  the  house 
was  given  to  the  Piache;  if  he  died,  the  fault  was  imputed  to  Destiny,  never  to  the 
physician.     [FD,  50.] 

314.  Among  the  Island  Carib  Indians  the  piai  procedure  was  of 
the  simplest  kind : 

They  say  that  the  Chemeen  [Sect.  90  et  seq.]  always  comes  on  scenting  the  odor  of 
this  incense  [tobacco]  and,  being  interrt^ated,  he  answers  with  a  clear  voice,  but 
sounding  as  from  a  distance.  The  sorcerer  then  approaches  the  sick  person  repeatedly, 
feels,  presses,  and  manipulates  the  suffering  part,  always  blowing  on  it,  and  extracts 
something  from  it,  or  rather  appears  to  extract,  some  thorns,  or  small  pieces  of  cassava, 
wood,  or  bones,  making  the  sick  person  believe  that  this  was  the  sole  cause  of  the  pain. 
Very  often  he  sucks  the  painful  part,  and  immediately  goes  out  of  the  house  to  vomit 
what  he  calls  the  poison.     [BBR,  234.] 

The  following  are  further  particulars  of  the  Island  practices  as 
reported  by  Rochefort  and  Poincy: 

The  Boye  .  .  consults  his  Familiar  Spirit  who  tells  him  that  it  is  the  [Familiar] 
Spiritof  such  an  one  who  has  done  it  [who  has  brought  the  mischief]  [RoP,  473].  .  .  . 
Then  the  devil  [Familiar  Spirit]  whom  he  has  invoked  .  .  .  violently  shakes  the  ridge 
of  the  roof,  or  with  some  other  noise  immediately  appears,  and  replies  distin('tly  to 
all  the  questions  asked  by  the  Boye  [ibid.,  563].  .  If  the  devil  assures  him  that 
the  illness  is  not  mortal,  both  the  Boye  and  the  accompanying  phantom  approach  the 
sick  person  to  assure  him  that  he  will  soon  be  cured:  and  to  encourage  him  in  this  hope 
they  touch  gently  the  most  painful  parts  of  his  body,  and  having  pressed  them  a  little 
pretend  to  extract  from  them  thorns,  broken  bones,  splinters  of  wood  and  stones  which 
these  wretched  doctors  say  were  the  cause  of  the  ill.  They  also  moisten  with  their 
breath  the  weak  spot  and  having  repeatedly  sucked  it,  they  persuade  the  patient 
that  by  this  means  they  have  extracted  the  poison  which  was  in  his  body  and  kept  it 
in  languor.  They  finally  rub  the  sick  person's  body  with  junipa  fruit.  .  .  But 
if  the  Boye  has  learnt  from  the  communication  which  he  has  had  with  his  demon 
that  the  sickness  is  a  fatal  one,  he  contents  himself  with  consoling  the  sick  person  by 
the  statement  that  this  God,  or  rather  to  say,  his  Familiar  Devil,  having  pity  on  him, 
wishes  to  take  him  into  his  company,  so  as  to  be  freed  from  all  his  infirmities.  [RoP, 
564.] 

315.  "With  regard  to  the  nature  of  the  Spirits  specially  invoked, 
Barrington  Brown  (Bro,  140)  when  describing  the  performances  of  a 
Makusi  piai  at  Mora  Village,  upper  Rupununi,  remarks  that — 

In  some  instances  the  good  spirit  for  the  time  being  brought  with  it  the  evil  one 
that  was  supposed  to  have  had  some  hand  in  producing  the  man's  malady;  and  then 
the  wife  asked  it  how  it  could  come  and  injure  a  being  who  had  never  harmed  it, 
begging  it  to  desist  and  leave  her  husband  alone.  The  only  answer  she  obtained  to 
this  appeal  was  a  most  diabolical,  mocking  laugh.    The  llakunaima,  or  great  spirit. 


352  '      ANIMISM   AND   FOLK-LOEB   OF   GXJIANA  INDIANS   [kth.  ANN.  SO 

was  never  called  upon  by  the  sorcerer  to  assist  or  cure  the  sick  man,  but  only  the  sub- 
ordinate inhabitants  of  spirit-land.' 

316.  As  to  the  extraordinary  variety  of  visible  objects  inserted 
into  the  body  of  the  victim  by  the  invisible  Spirit  and  similar  agencies, 
and  subsequently  extracted  by  massage  and  suction,  the  following 
win  give  some  idea:  Fangs  of  the  much-dreaded  Lachesis  mwtus, 
"bushmaster"  snake  (McClintock,  Ti.,  June,  1886,  p.  94),  grass-roots 
(G,  II,  27),  gravel-stone,  fish-bone,  bird's  claw,  snake's  tooth,  or  piece 
of  wire  (Br,  364-5),  a  worm  (HWB,  244),  a  miniature  bow  and  arrow 
(Or,  526).  The  last-mentioned  is  very  interesting  in  view  of  the 
Arawak  Indians'  behef  (Br,  361)  that  all  pain  is  due  to  the  Evil 
Spirit's  arrow  (Sect.  SSO).  The  medicos  of  the  Otomac  nation  suck 
with  such  force  as  to  extract  blood  from  the  patient,  and  when  this 
is  spat  out  on  a  cleared  space,  minute  stony  particles  are  to  be  seen 
in  it  (G,  II,  27).  Fathers  Grillet  and  Bechamel  apparently  gave 
approval  (GB,  48)  to  this  method  of  cure:  "Besides  divers  sorts 
of  Plants,  Gums,  and  Woods  they  use  to  cure  diseases  and  wounds, 
they  have  a  way  of  sucking  their  patients  in  that  part  of  the  body 
in  which  they  feel  their  pain,  and  this  method  is  most  commonly 
very  successful." 

317.  The  idea  that  not  only  the  patient  but  also  his  relatives  and 
others  should  abstain  from  certain  diets  was  very  widespread:  "The 
Piache's  first  prescription  is  to  impose  a  general  fast  on  the  patient 
and  aU  his  kinsfolk:  the  majority  of  the  PiacheS  demand  that  no  one 
belonging  to  the  house  should  eat  anything  hot,  anything  cooked,  or 
peppers"  (G,  i,  210).  With  the  Caribs,  Arawaks  (Sect.  308),  and 
Warraus,  the  whole  family — ^father,  mother,  brothers,  and  sisters — ^is 
dieted  on  exactly  the  same  lines  as  the  invalid.  "If  a  man  [Carib 
Islander]  gets  wounded  or  ill,  he  will  ask  his  brother,  sister,  or  some 
relation  to  abstain  from  eating  such  or  such  a  thing.  This  would 
make  their  pain  worse  even  if  they  were  fifty  miles  off"  (BBR,  250J. 
So  also  other  observances  may  be  incumbent  on  the  whole  family  as 
well  as  on  the  patient  (Sect.  ISO).  Among  the  Roucouyennes  of  the 
upper  Yary,  Cayenne,  besides  the  diet,  the  only  Ucense  which  the 
doctor  allows  the  patient  is  to  throw  himself  into  the  river  when  the 
fever  is  very  high  (Cr,  117).  As  a  matter  of  fact,  when  death  ensued 
in  spite  of  the  treatment,  this  was  usually  ascribed  to  disobedience 
as  to  food-restrictions,  though  other  causes  were  occasionally  held 
accountable.  Thus,  the  implacable  inveteracy  of  the  Spirit  causing 
the  mischief  may  be  too  powerful  for  the  doctor  to  contend  against, 
or  some  rival  sorcerer,  whom  the  sufferer  has  unhappily  made  his 

1  This  observation  is  quite  correct  because,  Irom  personal  inquiry  among  the  Mainland  Caribs  (Sect.  S09) 
and  from  the  records  left  to  us  of  the  Island  Caribs  (Sect.  90),  the  Spirits  invoked  were  undoubtedly  of  thu 
'Tamlllar"  class  (Sect.  S14).—'W.  E.  E. 


BOTH]  THE   MEDICINE-MAN  353 

enemy,  and  who  is  supposed  to  have  employed  the  Yawahu  m  destroy- 
ing him  (Br,  364-5),  will  at  times  come  in  for  a  share  of  the  blame.. 

318.  Crfivaux  (250)  states  that  when  consulted,  the  piai  is  offered 
a  cigarette:  if  he  accepts  it,  this  means  that  he  undertakes  to  visit 
the  sick  person.  He  will  not  receive,  however,  certaiu  gifts  (in  this 
this  case  a  comb,  child's  hammock,  and  sifter)  offered  binn  until  the 
sick  person  is  completely  cured.  "A  young  girl  is  sometimes  given 
as  payment  for  the  professional  services  of  the  piaiman  during  sick- 
ness, which  may  account  for  the  scale  of  his  domestic  establish- 
ment "  (Br,  320).  So  great  is  his  influence  among  the  women  that  his 
wives  are  always  the  choicest  (ScR,  i,  423-4).  With  the  Carib 
Islanders  it  was  customary  for  the  person  cured  to  express  his  grati- 
tude by  a  big  feast,  where  the  Boye,  who  had  helped  in  the  cure, 
held  first  rank  among  the  guests:  fiulhermore,  it  was  incumbent  on 
the  convalescent  not  to  omit  the  Anakri  (Sect.  89)  for  the  devil  [Fa- 
miliar Spirit]  who  did  not  fail  to  find  a  place  among  the  assembled 
company  (RoP,  564). 

319.  There  is  said  to  have  been  on  the  Islands  a  class  of  men  and 
of  Women  who,  though  in  a  large  measure  alleged  to  be  playing  the 
rdle  of  piai,  can  not  quite  correctly  be  classed  as  such;  references  to 
them  may  conveniently  be  given  here.  Besides  the  Boyes  or  Magi- 
cians, there  are  sorcerers  (sorders),  at  least  the  people  beueve  so,  who, 
according  to  what  they  say,  send  charms  on  them,  of  very  dangerous 
and  fatal  kinds,  and  these  sorcerers  they  kill  when  they  can  catch 
them;  their  presence  often  serves  as  a  pretext  for  getting  rid  of  one's 
enemies  (RoP,  474). 

They  believe  themselves  never  to  get  ill,  but  to  be  bewitched;  and,  simply  for  a 
headache  or  stomach-ache,  they  kill  or  cause  to  be  killed  those  whom  they  suspect 
to  have  given  it  to  them.  It  is  generally  a  woman  (Sect.  ^07),  since  they  dare  not 
openly  attack  a  man.  But  before  killing  her,  they  ill-treat  this  unfortunate  person  most 
cruelly.  Their  parents  and  friends  go  and  fetch  her,  and  she  is  then  made  to  search 
in  the  earth  in  different  places,  and  ill-treated,  until  she  finds  what  they  believe  her 
to  have  hidden;  and  very  often,  the  woman,  in  order  to  deliver  herself  from  her  exe- 
cutioners, confesses  what  is  not  true,  picking  up  some  pieces  of  shell  ...  or  fish- 
bones. .  .  .  When  the  women  who  are  accused  as  witches  pick  up  these  different 
shells  they  say  that  it  is  the  remains  of  wbat  the  bewitched  had  eaten,  which  the 
pretended  witch  had  buried  in  the  ground.  Many  incisions  are  then  made  on  her 
body.  She  is  hanged  by  the  feet;  a  kind  of  very  strong  pepper  (Sect.  g55)  called 
Piman  is  then  rubbed  in  her  eyes,  and  she  is  left  for  some  days  without  food,  until  a 
drunken  executioner  arrives  and  puts  an  end  to  the  unfortunate  being  by  breaking 
her  head  with  a  club.    [BBR,  232-234.] 

With  regard  to  the  celebration  of  the  anniversary  of  a  Guahibo 
chieftain's  death  on  the  maioland,  there  is  a  record  by  Cr6vaux  (548) 
of  the  medicine-man  casting,  or  rather  blowing,  a  speU  over  (souffle 
pour  Jeter  un  sortilege  d,)  the  individual  who  caused  the  death  [compare 
Sect.  85];  the  others,  men  and  women,  then  following  his  example. 

15961°— 30  BTH— 15 23 


Chaptbe  XVIII 
KANAIMA;  THE  INVISIBLE  OK  BROKEN  ARROW 

Expression  of  the  Law  of  Retaliation:  Kanaima  may  appear  as  a  human  being  or 
Spirit(5^0),  and  perhaps  can  be  satisfactorily  explained  (520^),  or  as  an  animal  (52^). 
Kanaima's  handiwork,  when  fatal,  can  be  recognized  as  such  only  by  the  piai  (522); 
Discovery  of  the  individual  under  whose  influence  Kanaima  haa  acted  (525);  search 
for  this  individual  by  one  of  deceased's  relatives,  or  by  a  hireling  (3H);  avenger 
proceeds  to  get  into  touch  with  his  victim  (325);  mutilates  him  with  poison,  club,  or 
arrow  (Si6),  but  only  to  such  extent  that  death  will  not  ensue  until  third  day  after 
{S27-S28),  when  he  will  complete  the  mutilation  of  the  corpse,  and  so  obtain  his  own 
purification  {S29). 

The  Invisible  or  Broken  Arrow  (SSOSSt);  the  Misson  of  the  Arrow  (SSI A). 

330.  An  individual  becomes  exceedingly  Ul.  All  the  ordinary 
everyday  remedies  have  been  resorted  to,  the  piai  has  invoked  his 
Familiar  Spirit,  yet  the  patient  dies;  or  he  may  sometimes  expire 
without  warniag.  The  very  fact  of  the  medicine-man's  inability 
to  effect  a  cure  serves  only  to  confirm  the  belief  held  in  certain 
tribes — ^Akawaios,  Makusis,  Arekvmas,  for  example — that  the  vic- 
tim's condition  is  the  work  of  some  human  agency  more  or  less 
disguised,  modified,  or  influenced  by  a  peculiarly  terrible  Spirit 
known  as  Kanaima  (Sect.  307).  lie  word  itself  is  said  to  be 
Akawaio;  the  Arawak  term  is  Mahui,  which  thus  comes  to  be 
applied  by  this  people  to  all  Akawaios  in  general.  According  to 
inquiry  made  of  the  Arawaks,  who,  like  the  Caribs  and  Warraus, 
do  not  appear  to  know  very  much  about  the  subject,  and  that  only  at 
second-hand,  Kanaima  is  said  to  be  the  name  of  a  certain  tree  growing 
ia  the  savannahs,  of  which  the  sap  has  remarkable  properties.  After 
rubbing  himself  with  it  a  man  will  go  mad  and  become  changed  into 
some  animal,  as  a  tiger  or  a  snake,  and  do  people  harm.  The  sap  can 
also  be  thrown  over  other  folk  with  similar  results.  But  the  word 
mentioned  has  really  a  very  extended  meaning;  it  is  the  expression  of 
the  law  of  retaliation,  which  is  sacredly  observed  among  the  Indians 
of  Guiana  (Da,  16),  at  least,  certainly  among  the  Makusis,  Akawais, 
Wapisianas,  and  Arekunas.  Though  applied  to  thS  man  who  has 
devoted  himself  to  perform  a  deed  of  blood,  it  seems  more  properly 
to  belong  to  the  murderous  Spirit  under  the  influence  of  which  he 
acts,  and  which  is  supposed  to  possess  him  (Br,  373);  it  indicates  also 
the  person  whose  rights  have  been  injured  (ScR,  i,  322-3)  as  well  as 
the  whole  mode  of  procedure,  including  the  means,  poison,  etc., 
employed.  Thus,  the  audacity  of  the  Akawais  "in  these  predatory 
excursions  is  astonishing.  If  a  party  can  muster  eight  or  ten  stand 
354 


BOTH]  kanaima;  the  invisible  abbow  355 

of  fire-arms  it  will  fight  its  way  through  all  the  mountain  tribes, 
though  at  open  war  with  them;  and  by  the  rapidity  of  their  marches 
and  nightly  enterprises,  which  they  call  Kanaima,  they  conceal  the 
weakness  of  their  numbers,  and  carry  terror  before  them"  (HiC,  234). 
Schombiu:gk  says  it  was  impossible  to  learn  clearly  how  Kanaima  is 
regarded,  because  he  appears  not  only  as  an  evil  invisible  Being 
{damonisches  Wesen)  and,  in  many  cases,  as  a  particular  personality 
(individv^Ue  persordicKkeit) ,  but  always  as  the  avenger  of  a  known 
or  an  unknown  injury.  Who  and  what  Kanaima  was,  they  could 
not  teU  us,  but  they  reckoned  that  every  casualty  (TodesfaM)  was  due 
to  him.  I  had  already  observed  the  thirst  for  vengeance  among 
the  Warraus  which  often  overcomes  and  tortures  an  Indian  to  the 
point  of  madness,  as  soon  as  he  considers  himself  injured  in  his  repu- 
tation or  ui  his  wife;  a  thirst  which  is  but  quenched  with  the  death 
of  the  offender,  or  in  the  annihilation  of  his  whole  family  (ScR,  i,  322). 

The  same  author  gives  an  account  of  a  certain  waterfall  on  the 
upper  Cotinga  which  his  terrified  Indians  tried  to  get  past  as  quickly 
and  as  quietly  as  possible.  Kanaima,  the  hereditary  enemy  of  the 
human  race,  was  being  followed  by  a  powerful  Spirit:  the  pmrsuer 
was  close  at  hand,  escape  seemed  impossible,  the  steep  bank  pre- 
ventiQg  further  flight  over  level  ground,  but  in  this  opening  it  was 
possible:  he  burrowed  in  here,  and  came  out  again  on  the  opposite 
shore  of  the  river  bank  about  ten  or  twelve  miles  farther  on,  whence 
he  emerged  to  continue  afresh  his  torments  upon  mankind  (ScR,  n, 
182). 

320A.  And  yet  again  it  is  quite  possible  that  the  term  Kanaima  may 
have  an  easily  inteUigible  origin  based  on  the  bloody  exploits  of  certain 
of  the  Rio  Branco  tribes,  whose  reputation,  through  the  avenues  of 
exchange  and  barter,  could  easily  have  reached  the  Indians  of  British 
Guiana.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  I  can  not  recall  at  present  a  single 
instance  of  Kanaima  cuUed  from  the  hterature  dealing  with  Cayenne, 
Surinam,  or  the  Orinoco  region.  At  the  head  of  the  River  Jauapiry 
and  River  Taruman-Assu  (streams  flowing  into  the  Rio  Negro  to  the 
eastward  of  the  Rio  Branco)  are  a  series  of  wild  tribes.  These  tribes 
are  not  wild  in  the  sense  of  making  war  on  civihzed  and  quiet  peoples 
(mansos),  but  are  Kanaima  tribes  (tribiis  canaemes) ,  as  the  Indians  of 
the  upper  Rio  Branco  call  them,  that  is,  they  are  tribes  of  cut-throats 
by  profession,  educated  from  generation  to  generation  in  murder  and 
theft,  killing  for  the  pleasmre  of  killing,  not  even  eating  their  vic- 
tims but  utilizing  their  tibias  for  flutes  and  their  teeth  for  necklaces. 
Indians  of  a  dozen  tribes  have  assured  me,  says  C^udreau,  that 
there  exists  among  the  canaemes  an  association  of  piais  who  exert 
great  influence.  What  makes  the  thing  appear  very  probable  is  that 
it  is  known  that  these  various  Kanaima  tribes  are  alhed  and  more  or 
less  united  (solidaires).    [Cou,  ii,  235-6.] 


356  ANIMISM   AND   FOLK-LOBE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS   [etb.  ann.  30 

331.  As  already  hinted,  the  Kanaima  may  just  as  often  be  in  the 
form  of  an  animal.  "Many  of  the  Indians  believe  that  these 
'Kanaima'  animals  are  possessed  by  the  spirits  of  men  who  have 
devoted  themselves  to  deeds  of  blood  and  cannibalism.  To  enjoy 
the  savage  delight  of  killing  and  devouring  h-uman  beings,  such  a 
person  will  assume  the  form,  or  his  soul  animate  the  body,  of  a  jaguar 
[Sects.  146, 147,  I4B],  approach  the  sleeping-places  of  men,  or  waylay 
the  solitary  Indian  in  his  path"  (Br,  373).  One  can  tell,  by  the 
effects,  the  particular  animal  whose  characteristics  Kanaima  has 
assumed.  Does  he  give  a  blow  that  stretches  his  victim  on  the 
ground  ?  Then  he  is  a  "tiger."  Does  he  in  wrestling  find  his  arms 
encircling  the  neck  of  him  devoted  to  destruction  ?  Then  he  imbibes 
the  spirit  of  the  camudi,  and  like  the  constrictor,  strangles  (Da,  277)' 
He  may  appear  also  in  the  form  of  a  bird,  and  may  even  enter  a 
person's  body  in  the  form  of  an  insect,  a  worm,  or  even  an  inanimate 
object. 

322.  When  a  person  dies  it  is  only  the  piai  who  knows  whether  the 
death  is  due  to  an  evil  Spirit,  or  to  the  "poison"  [blood-revenge]  of 
another  Indian.  If  to  the  former,  he  is  buried  with  the  usual  cere- 
monial, but  it  the  verdict  is  that  he  was  sacrificed  for  some  offence, 
the  corpse  is  carefully  examined,  and  should  only  a  blue  spot  or 
somethkig  unusual  be  foimd  on  it,  the  piai  will  show  that  here  the 
victim  was  wounded  with  the  iuvisible  poisoned  arrow  (ScR,  ii, 
496).i 

323.  Once  the  handiwork  of  Kanaima  has  been  recognized,  the 
piai's  powers,  as  such,  are  not  brought  into  further  requisition,  in  the 
way  of  retaliation  or  revenge-  on  the  particular  individual  with  whose 
connivance  this  terrible  Spirit  has  wrought  the  mischief.  It  is  not 
the  Kanaima  but  his  human  agent  who  is  sought  for  punishment. 
The  retaUation  and  revenge  are  matters  for  the  victim's  relatives 
and  friends  to  deal  with,  and  various  measures  are  adopted  by  them 
to  discover  the  particular  individual  specially  concerned.  [Among 
the  Arawaks]  in  order  to  ascertain  this  a  pot  is  filled  with  certain 
leaves  [and  water]  and  placed  over  a  fire:  when  it  begins  to  boil 
over  they  consider  that  on  whichever  side  the  scum  first  falls,  it 
points  out  the  quarter  from  whence  the  murderer  came  (Be,  57). 
Among  the  Makusis,  above  the  Waraputa  Falls,  Essequibo  River, 
Schomburgk  relates  the  following  striking  instance:  "A  Makusi  boy 
had  died  of  dropsy,  and  his  relatives  endeavored  to  discover  the 
quarter  to  which  the  Kanaima,  who  was  supposed  to  have  slain 
him,  belonged  .  .  .  the  father,  cutting  from  the  corpse  both  the 
thumbs  and  little  fingers,  both  the  great  and  the  little  toes,  and  a 
piece  of  each  heel,  threw  these  pieces  into  a  new  pot  which  had  been 

1  For  further  information  concerning  this  particular  arrow,  see  Sects.  SSO,  SSI. 


=oTH]  kanaima;  the  invisible  abeow  357 

filled  with  water.  A  fire  was  kindled,  and  on  this  the  pot  was  placed. 
When  the  water  began  to  boil,  according  to  the  side  on  which  one  of 
the  pieces  was  first  thrown  out  from  the  pot  by  the  bubbling  of  the 
water,  in  that  direction  would  the  Kanaima  be"  (ScR,  i,  325).  A 
consultation  is  thereupon  held,  the  place  is  pointed  out,  and  the 
individual  whose  death  is  to  atone  for  that  of  the  deceased  (Be,  57). 
If  any  one — man,  woman,  or  child — has  incurred  the  hatred  of  the 
all-powerful  piai,  or  should  the  latter  be  desirous  of  the  wife  of  some 
Indian,  this  or  the  other  would  be  the  cause  of  the  death  (ScR,  n,  496). 

324.  A  near  relative  is  charged  with  the  work  of  vengeance:  he 
becomes  a  Kanaima,  is  supposed  to  be  possessed  by  the  destroying 
Spirit  so-called,  and  has  to  five  apart  according  to  strict  rule,  and 
submit  to  many  privations  until  the  deed  of  blood  be  accomplished 
(Br,  357).  If  the  individual  can  not  be  foimd,  or  rather  if  the  favor- 
able opportunity  for  committing  the  deed  does  not  present  itself, 
although  it  will  be  sought  for  years,  any  other  member  of  his  family 
will  sufiice.  Sometimes  the  near  relative  will  charge  himself  with 
the  duty:  a  little  Warrau  boy  of  about  12  years  of  age  avenges  his 
father's  and  mother's  death  by  smashing  in  the  piai's  skull  with  a 
club  when  the  latter  hes  drunk  in  his  hammock  (ScR,  i,  158). 
Formerly,  the  Indians  at  the  Great  FaUs  of  the  Demerara  were 
employed  by  the  Arawaks  of  the  lower  district  to  work  their  vengeance 
as  Kanaima  mercenaries  (Da,  277).  The  Indians  of  Itfiuni,  Berbice 
River,  sent  a  deputation  to  the  Arekuna  tribe  with  presents,  to 
induce  them  to  come  and  exterminate  Mekro  and  hia  settlement. 
These  Arekunas,  chosen  for  the  deed  of  blood  on  account  of  the 
remoteness  of  their  habitation  as  likely  to  baffle  all  trace  of  the  origi- 
nators (Da,  16),  came  over  from  a  great  distance.  Some  Indians,  who 
are  adepts  in  the  art  of  making  subtle  poisons,  hire  themselves  out 
to  rid  their  employers  of  any  obnoxious  individuals,  and  these  are 
called  Kanaimas  (Bro,  141).  These  examples  serve  to  show  how  the 
work  of  vengeance  could  be  deputed  to  strangers  and  mercenaries. 

3S5.  But  whoever  it  may  be  that  is  charged  with  the  duty  of 
avenging  the  death,  he  suddenly  disappears  from  the  settlement: 
no  one  knows  where  he  is.  He  wanders  now  as  Kanaima  through 
the  forests,  valleys,  and  heights,  and  does  not  return  until  he  has 
slain  his  victim  or  shot  bim  with  the  poisoned  arrow.  Half  a  year 
or  more  [even  years]  may  thus  be  spent,  dming  which  time  he  avoids 
all  contact  with  other  Indians.  From  the  moment  he  leaves  the 
settlement,  he  is  outlawed— he  has  cut  all  the  ties  which  bind  him  to 
hia  family  and  his  tribe — and  it  is  the  business  of  any  Indians  who 
may  meet  him  in  the  bush,  to  kill  him  (ScR,  i,  322-3).  Nor  is  he 
allowed  to  speak  with  any  he  may  meet  in  his  way,  says  Bernau 
(57),  but  Hilhouse  makes  the  statement  for  the  Arawaks,  that  an 
Indian  who  is  deputed  to  revenge  a  murder  will  follow  his  enemy 


358  ANIMISM  AND  FOLK-LOEE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS   [eth.  ANN.  30 

for  years,  publicly  avowing  hie  purpose,  which  he  will  relinquish 
only  with  life  (HiC,  231).  He  has  to  abstain  from  meat  and  live  on 
what  the  forest  supplies,  a  fact  which  will  account  for  his  usually 
emaciated  appearance.  As  for  ornament,  he  is  credited  with  wearing 
a  curiously  wrought  cap  (Be,  57),  but  it  is  the  bodily  decoration 
which  gives  him  his  distinctive  features.  He  paLats  bright  red  spots 
on  his  skin,  to  show  that,  changing  hito  a  jaguar  at  night,  he  can 
thus  slay  his  victims.  A  set  of  jaguar's  claws  hung  up  in  a  sorcerer's 
hut  have  the  same  threatening  signification  (BrB,  154).  In  describ- 
ing two  such  Kanaimas,  Dance  says  that  their  emaciated  bodies 
were  painted  in  lines:  they  were  tigers  or  [boa]-constrictors  (Da,  276). 
Schomburgk  talks  of  the  avenger  being  painted  in  a  peculiar  manner, 
and  clothed  with  an  animal  skin  (ScR,  i,  324). 

336.  The  longed-for  opportunity  arrives  at  last;  the  Kanaima  finds 
his  victim  alone,  and  slays  him  by  poison,  the  arrow,  or  the  club. 
Among  the  Akawaios  especially,  but  also  among  the  Makusis,  Wapi- 
sianas,  and  Arekunas,  a  frightful  poison  known  as  wassi  is  brought  into 
requisition.  This  is  extracted  from  the  bulb  or  tuber  of  a  plant  which 
the  Indians  refused  to  show  him,  says  Schomburgk,  in  spite  of  entreaty 
and  rich  reward,  on  the  score  that  if  the  Paranaghieris  [Europeans] 
knew  it,  they  would  immediately  discover  its  antidote.  They  cut  the 
bulb  into  thin  shavings,  dry  in  the  sun,  and  then  crush  to  the  finest 
powder,  which  has  quite  the  appearance  of  arsenic.  Should  the  alleged 
delinquent  be  caught  asleep,  some  of  this  powder  is  strewn  upon  his 
lips  or  under  his  nose,  so  that  it  is  inhaled.  A  sharp  burning  sensa- 
tion in  the  bowels,  a  raging  fever,  and  a  tantahzing  thirst,  with  no 
means  of  obtaining  relief,  are  the  symptoms  of  the  poison,  and  convince 
the  victim  that  his  days,  even  his  hours,  are  numbered.  Within  four 
weeks  he  becomes  reduced  to  a  skeleton  and  dies  in  fearful  torment. 
(ScR,  I,  323.)  Thus,  among  the  Makusis  at  Mora  on  the  Rupu- 
nimi  River,  was  met  an  unfortunate  woman  whose  attenuated  body 
was  a  most  shocking  sight:  she  was  a  living  skeleton,  being  nothing 
but  skin  and  bones,  with  the  exception  of  the  face,  which  was  not 
reduced  in  proportion  with  that  of  the  rest  of  the  body:  they  told  me, 
says  Brown,  that  this  woman  had  come  to  them  from  the  Ireng  River 
district,  where  she  had  been  poisoned  by  Kanaimas,  and  that  this 
accounted  for  her  wasted  condition  (Bro,  258).  Another  account 
I  am  able  to  quote,  from  the  Mazaruni  River,  where  a  white  powder 
is  employed  by  inunction.  It  appeared  that  the  murdered  man  had 
been  induced  to  jom  a  fishing  party,  and  then  had  been  set  upon  by 
a  number  of  men,  who  had  forced,  his  hmbs  out  of  joint,  rubbed  his 
body  over  with  a  white  powder  made  from  a  species  of  wild  tan- 
nier,  and  then  puUed  them  into  their  sockets  again:  he  managed  to 
reach  home  with  great  difficulty  and  take  to  his  hammock,  where 
.he  was  seized  with  vomiting   and   died  in  a  few   hours  (Bro,  55). 


BOTH]  KA.NAIMA;    THE  INVISIBLE   ABKOW  359 

Further  reference  to  this  poison  was  obtained  from  the  upper 
Pomeroon  Caribs,  who  speak  of  it  as  massi,  and  tell  me  of  its  being 
put  to  use  by  the  Akawaios  as  follows:  Massi  is  a  weed  which  is 
rubbed  on  a  thin  stick  and  the  latter  is  pointed  at  the  individual 
it  is  wished  to  injure.  The  person  so  pointed  at  miist  come  to  the 
one  holding  the  stick,  and  as  he  walks  along,  he  falls  down  in  a  sort 
of  fainting  fit:  While  thus  unconscious,  Kanaima  covers  him  with 
trisel  {Pentacleffira  filamentosa)  and  thus  makes  him  wake,  but  by 
this  time  Kanaima  changes  himseK  into  an  acouri  or  a  deer.  As  the 
victim  limps  along,  he  startles  either  one  of  these  animals,  and  by 
this  sign  or  token  recognizes  that  Eanaima  has  been  giving  him 
"medicine."* 

337.  Now,  whichever  means — as,  poison,  arrow,  club,  visible  or 
invisible — the  Kanaima  agent  may  employ  to  carry  out  his  design, 
he  especially  refrains  from  causing  the  immediate  death  of  his  vic- 
tim for  the  reason  that  at  least  a  three  days'  respite  or  interregnimi 
has  to  be  observed  before  he  can  complete,  on  his  victim's  body, 
those  particular  rites  (Sect.  329)  without  the  due  observance  of  which 
he  can  not  obtain  his  own  purification.  If  circumstances  should 
prevent  him  thus  being  purified,  he  must  become  demented  and 
die  raving  mad.  Hence,  after  assuring  himself  that  the  actual  death 
will  not  take  place  before  three  days  shall  have  passed,  he  makes 
equally  certain  of  the  sufferer  in  the  meantime  holding  his  tongue  in 
more  senses  than  one,  thus  preventing  him  giving  any  definite  clue 
to  his  assailant's  identity  or  existence  in  the  immediate  neighbor- 
hood. To  effect  this,  the  ^tanaima  devotee  accordingly  sUts  his 
victim's  tongue  with  the  fangs  of  a  most  poisonous  snake.  Schom- 
burgk  tells  us  from  his  own  experience  (ScR,  i,  324)  how  the  Indians 
collect  the  fangs  of  such  snakes.  Of  course  accidents  will  often 
happen,  and  even  after  taking  the  precaution  of  shooting  an  arrow 
into  his  back,  the  victim  may  be  killed  on  the  spot:  in  such  a  case 
the  Kanaima  agent  will  bury  the  corpse  at  once  superficially  in  the 
spot  where  the  man  fell,  taking  care  to  remember  the  place,  that  he 
may  find  it  when  he  returns,  after  the  third  day,  to  complete  the  final 
ceremony.  Even  should  the  woimd  fail  to  prove  immediately  fatal, 
before  the  poor  creature  can  reach  home  the  tongue  has  become 
inflamed  and  swollen,  so  that  he  (or  she)  is  unable  to  tell  who  did 
the  deed.  Dance  speaks  of  another  method  of  impairing  speech,  by 
twisting  the  tongue,  and  inserting  poisoned  piUs  into  the  mouth. 
These  pUls  are  composed  of  the  parings  of  a  macaw's  bill,  parings  of 
cowhorn,  dog's  hair,  scrapings  from  the  bulb-root  of  the  dhu  turn, 
and  another  poison,  the  name  of  which  was  not  ascertained  (Da,  278). 

1  On  the  Rio  I(;ana  (upper  Rio  Negro),  maralva-imb&ra  is  the  secret  magic  poison  to  which  every 
death  Is  ascribed  (KG,  I,  4S,  207,  214). 


360  AISIMISM   AND  FOLK-LOBE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS   [=th.  ahn.  30 

Brett  thus  talks  of  an  Akawai  murdered  on  the  banks  of  the  Mana- 
warin,  a  branch  of  the  Moruca:  "The  deed  was  perpetrated  by  a 
'Kanaima'  devotee  m  the  usual  manner,  and  close  to  the  Indian  set- 
tlement: A  loud  shout  was  heard  in  the  forest,  and  when  the  friends 
of  the  victim  ran  to  the  spot,  they  found  him  on  the  ground  with  his 
back  and  neck  bruised,  but  not  bleeding.  He  had  been  deprived  of 
speech  by  the  murderer  according  to  the  cruel  system  followed  in 
those  crimes"  (Br,  269). 

338.  If  the  sufferer  is  found  by  his  friends  and  carried  home,  the 
perpetrator  of  the  deed,  the  Kanaima,  is  obliged  to  hover  near,  to 
discover  the  place  of  burial  (Br,  357-60),  for  reasons  already  stated 
{Sect.S^).  But  the  victim's  friends  are  equally  shrewd  in  burying 
the  corpse  so  secretly  that  its  whereabouts  shall  not  be  known  to  him, 
hence  every  precaution  is  taken  to  insm-e  this  object.  ShoTild  the 
site  of  burial  be  ultimately  discovered  by  the  Kanaima,  however — 
and  the  friends  of  the  victim  will  take  no  chances — they  will  either 
poison  the  corpse  or  stick  "pimplers"  (pabn-spines)  into  it.  Thus, 
a  man  having  been  killed  by  ^uio,  the  corpse  was  laid  out  naked, 
with  a  basin  of  water  vmder  it,  into  which  the  pimplers  of  the  parepi 
paJm  were  placed.  The  body  was  then  washed  with  the  water,  and 
a  portion  of  the  spines  were  broken,  and  forced  into  the  body.  When 
laid  in  the  grave,  the  remainiag  spines  were  strewn  over  his  body: 
this,  they  said,  would  kill  the  man  who  tasted  of  the  juice  of  the  dead 
body  (Da,  278).  Or  again,  so  as  to  make  certain  of  revenge  on 
Kanaima,  if  the  grave  is  molested  by  him,  some  of  the  deceased's 
friends  will  open  the  body,  take  out  the  liver,  and  put  a  red-hot  ax- 
head  in  its  place.  If  after  that  is  done,  the  Kanaima  should  disturb 
the  corpse,  the  intense  heat  which  was  in  the  ax-head,  when  placed 
there,  will  pass  into  the  Kanaima  devotee's  body,  consuming  his 
vitals  and  causing  hitn  to  perish  miserably.  An  Akawai  told  Brett  of 
another  plan  that  is  sometimes  followed,  namely,  wurali  poison  is 
placed  on  the  dead  body  (Br,  359-60). 

339.  On  the  third  night  the  Kanaima  visits  the  grave  and  sticks 
a  pointed  staff  into  the  body:  upon  drawing  thisout,  if  there  is  blood 
on  it,  he  will  lick  it  off,  and  all  the  dangerous  consequences  of  his 
act  are  paralyzed  for  him,  with  the  resiilt  that  he  returns  contented 
to  his  settlement  (ScR,  ii,  497).  He  has  undei^one  purification,  so  to 
speak.*  He  cannot  be  released  from  the  power  of  the  evil  Spirit 
which  possesses  him  until  he  has  performed  this  act.  If  this,  which 
is  an  offering  to  the  Kanaima  Spirit  within  him,  be  accomplished, 
he  becomes  like  other  men,  and  can  return  to  his  family,  but  if  not, 
he  wanders  on  tiU  madness  or  some  other  dire  consequences,  through 
the  agency  of  the  disappointed  Spirit,  are  beUeved  to  come  upon  him 

1  Compare  the  licking  of  the  switch  by  the  girl  at  puberty  (Sect.  171). 


BOTH]  kanaima;  the  invisible  aebow  361 

(Br,  359).  The  Arawak  is  firmly  convinced  that  if  the  Kanaima, 
on  the  third  day,  cannot  taste  any  of  his  victim's  blood,  he  will  become 
mad  and  die  mad  (SeK,  n,  497) ;  he  can  be  freed  only  if  he  succeed 
in  leaving  behind  his  two  distinctive  death-marks — the  swollen  tongue 
and  the  damaged  entrails.  The  original  doctrine  of  Eanaima  would 
almost  seem  to  have  constituted  a  special  cult,  the  inner  working  of 
which  it  is  now  hard  to  unravel.  Brett  says  that,  among  the 
Akawais,  the  whole  system  of  Kanaima  is  tar^ht  by  father  to  son 
in  many  families  (Br,  358). 

330.  It  has  been  already  stated  (Sect.  S£8)  that  Kanaima's 
handiwork  may  be  recognized  in  the  blue  spot  due  to  the  invisible 
poisoned  arrow  employed  by  him.  On  the  Xapo  River  (Amazon), 
the  Indians  will  "attribute  many  of  their  ills  to  the  puffing  of 
invisible  darts  into  their  bodies  by  evil,  designing  persons — an  idea 
no  doubt  suggested  by  the  mysterious  and  silent  operation  of  their 
own  instruments  of  offence"  (AS,  155).  A  similar  belief  is  ciirrent 
in  the  Guianas.  Caribs  ascribe  children's  sicknesses  (Sect.  110) 
and  Arawaks  otherwise  unaccountable  illness  in  general,  and  any 
sharp  sudden  agonizing  pains  in  particular,  to  an  invisible  arrow. 
The  latter  tribe  will  often  describe  it  as  the  Bush  Spirit's  arrow 
(Yawahu-shlmara).  Interesting  in  this  connection  is  the  fact  that 
a  miniature  bow  and  arrow  may  be  extracted  by  the  piai  from 
the  patient's  body  by  means  of  massage  and  suction  (Sect.  316). 
There  are  further  beliefs  about  certain  mysterious  arrows  which  it  is 
worth  noting.  Where  the  arrow  sank  into  the  water,  there  lurked 
the  danger  in  the  shape  of  submerged  rocks,  but  where  it  floated, 
there  the  passage  was  clear  for  the  corial  to  pass  (Sect.  151).  Owing 
to  an  invisible  fungus  growing  upon  the  arrow  in  the  one  case  (Sect. 
145)  and  upon  the  bowman's  arm  in  the  other  (Sect.  144)>  the  missile 
does  not  hit  its  mark.  When  either  is  properly  cleaned,  however,  the 
arrow  is  made  to  spUt  a  fishing-line  and  a  distant  hanging-viae  rope, 
respectively.  It  has  been  claimed  for  the  Spirits,  and  medicine- 
man— and  after  all,  the  powers  of  these  agents  were  identical — as 
almost  one  of  their  perquisites,  so  to  speak  (Sect.  SO),  that  they 
alone  can  hit  an  animal  by  shooting  the  arrow  up  into  the  air  and 
letting  it  fall  from  above  on  the  quarry.  As  a  matter  of  fact  this 
was  once  a  more  or  less  common  practice  among  the  tiu"tle-himters 
of  the  Amazon  and  Orinoco.* 

331.  A  few  words  on  certain  ideas  concerning  broken  bows  and 
broken  arrows  must  be  given  place  here.  The  term  "broken"  would 
seem  to  represent  almost  the  normal  condition  in  which  certain  of  the 
Bush  Spirits  employed  bows,  for  which  reason  some  of  these  denizens  of 
the  forest  were  known  as  Shimarabu-akarad&ni  (Sect.  95).    The  same 

>  I  have  observed  and  since  recorded  the  same  metbod  among  tbe  natives  of  North  Qaeensland. — 
W.  E.  R. 


362  ANIMISM  AND  FOLK-LOKE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS   taiH.  ANN.  30 

Beings  were  also  evidently  not  averse  to  using  broken  arrows,  subse- 
quently spliced  (Sect.  144)  >  but  it  is  certainly  difficult  to  trace  the 
raison-d'6tre  of  the  self-castigation  with  the  two  halves  of  a  broken 
arrow  to  insure  strength  and  courage  (Sects.  1S9,  221B). 

331A.  The  idea  of  invisible  poisoned  or  broken  arrows  noted  in, 
the  two  next  sections  preceding  may  possibly  bear  relation  to  one  of 
the  procedures  adopted  in  the  declaration  of  hostilities  on  the  out- 
break of  war.  Thus,  the  call  to  arms  may  be  noiseless,  the  emissaries 
silently  announcing  the  fact  that  the  tribe  is  at  war  without  even  say- 
ing a  word,  for  it  suffices  to  leave  in  passing  a  barbed  arrow  in  a  public 
place  for  all  to  take  up  arms.  This  notice  is  called  the  Mission  of  the 
Arrow  {correr  la  Jlecha)  and  is  tantamount  to  a  declaration  of  a  state 
of  war  (G,  i,  134).  Martins  recorded  a  similar  procedure  among 
the  Caribs,  Yuri,  Miranya,  and  others  (Beitrage,  i,  97) ;  the  practice 
is  also  observed  with  the  Guaxiua  of  the  Yapura  at  the  present  day 
(KG,  II,  316). 


Chapter  XIX 

MISCELLANEOUS    INDIAX    BELIEFS    COXCERNING    MAN 

•  AND   ANIMALS 

Dwarfs,  People  with  their  Feet  Turned  Backward,  Touvingas,  White  and  White- 
haired  Folk,  Acephali  (552);  Amazons  (3S3-S34).  Orang-Utang,  etc.  (SS5-336); 
Warracaba  "Tiger"  (557);  "Tigers"  in  general  (SS8);  Tapir  (559);  Armadillo  (5^); 
Buah-hog  and  "Skunk"  (5^7);  Anteater  (5->£);  Sloth  (343);  Turtle,  etc.  (344);  Alli- 
gator (34S);  Gecko  (,346);  Snakes  in  general  (5.^7);  Camudi  (5-^);  Frogs  (5^);  Birds 
(550);  Fish  {351);  Insects  {351A). 

332.  Wliat  more  natural  from  the  primitive  man's  point  of  view 
than  that  lake  people  and  river  people,  more  often  in  the  water  than 
out  of  itj  should  come  to  be  looked  on  as  fish;  that  men  invariably 
wearing  their  headdress  in  a  manner  usually  considered  appropriate 
only  for  the  opposite  sex,  should  be  regarded  in  the  light  of  women; 
and  that  monkeys,  grown  in  imagination  to  man's  size,  should  come 
to  be  the  dread  of  unprotected  females  1  We  have  our  Fish  folk 
(Sects.  162,  178),  our  Amazons  (Sects.  157,  296),  our  Orang-utangs 
and  the  like  (Sects.  138,  I4OA)  in  Guiana  folk-lore.  But  there  are 
other  peculiar  people  to  be  reckoned  with  also.  The  Toupinambous, 
inhabiting  a  large  island  in  the  River  Amazon  below  the  Rio  Negro, 
told  Father  Acuna  (158)  that  on  the  south  side  near  their  island — 

there  are  two  Nations  among  others  upon  the  Continent  that  are  very  remarkable; 
one  of  them  are  Dwarfs  as  small  as  little  children,  and  are  called  Guayazis,  the  other 
is  a  Race  of  people  that  come  into  the  world  with  their  feet  turned  behind  them, 
so  that  those  that  are  unacquainted  with  their  monstrous  shape,  and  should  follow 
their  Track,  would  run  from  them  instead  of  overtaking  them.  They  are  tailed 
Matayus,  and  are  tributary  to  the  Toupinambous,  whom  they  are  obliged  to  furnish 
with  Hatchets  made  of  stone  to  fell  great  trees  with,  when  they  have  a  mind  to  clear 
a  piece  of  ground;  for  they  frame  these  Hatchets  very  neatly,  and  it  is  their  whole 
business  to  make  them. 

According  to  the  idea  current  among  the  Trios,  people  were  origin- 
ally like  wood  and  stone,  and  had  no  faces  (Go,  12).  On  the  upper 
Parou,  French  Guiana,  Cr^vaux  (284)  passed  a  small  stream  up 
which  the  Ouayanas  never  venture,  owing  to  the  reputed  presence  of 
white-haired  Indians  who  sleep  by  day  and  walk  by  night.  History 
does  not  say  whether  it  was  the  unusual  coloration  or  the  nocturnal 
perambulation  that  rendered  them  so  uncanny  to  his  native  com- 
panions. Brown  (Bro,  281),  when  at  the  Orindouie  Falls  on  the 
Ireng,  saw  on  distant  ridges  to  the  eastward  Indian  villages,  the 
inhabitants  of  which,  his  Cumumaring  guide  informed  him,  were 

363 


364  ANIMISM  AND  FOLK-LOEB   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS   [bth.  ann.  30 

turning  white,  and  in  time  would  be  white  people.  The  association 
with  white  people  of  the  idea  of  life  everlasting  in  this  mundane 
world,  an  idea  which  the  Indians  themselves  possessed,  has  already 
been  referred  to  (Sect.  66).  In  a  work  by  J.  J.  Hartsinck  (ii,  810), 
occurs  the  following  passage  concerning  certain  negroes  at  Saramaccaj 

Regarding  the  "Touvingas"  or  Two-fingered  Negroes  fpl.  7]  it  is  observed  that 
they  are  a  people  who  had  only  two  large  fingers  on  their  hands  and  two  large  toes  on 
their  feet,  similar  to  those  of  a  crab,  as  is  figured  in  the  illustration.  The  wrist  is 
somewhat  larger  than  that  of  the  average  man:  the  thumb  and  little  finger  are  more 
than  twice  the  usual  size,  and  stand  out  from  the  limb,  have  a  bend  at  the  tip,  and 
appear  as  one  piece  of  flesh  on  which  there  is  something  like  a  nail.  The  palm  of  the 
hand  has  no  bends,  but  appears  as  a  solid  mass,  yet  the  divisions  can  be  felt.  .  .  . 
After  the  declaration  of  freedom,  these  negroes  of  Saramacca  walked  publicly  through 
Paramaribo.  .  .  .  Many  argue  that  they  are  not  a  distinct  tribe  or  nation,  but  just 
a  family  who  by  accident  or  freak  of  nature  have  been  thus  deformed.  These  people 
are  becoming  very  rare  indeed,  probably  through  intercourse  with  others,  iast  bastard- 
izing. 

The  forests  of  the  River  Sipapo,  Orinoco,  are  altogether  unknown, 
and  there  the  missionaries  place  the  nation  of  the  Rayas,  whose 
mouths  are  believed  to  be  in  their  navels;  they  were  so  called  on 
account  of  the  pretended  analogy  with  the  fish  of  this  name,  the  mouth 
of  which  seems  as  if  forced  downward  below  the  body:  an  old  Indian 
at  Carichana,  who  boasted  of  having  often  eaten  human  flesh, 
had  seen  these  acephali  with  his  own  eyes  (AVH,  ii,  317).  Mianiko, 
one  of  the  three  tribal  Kob^ua  heroes,  had  no  head,  but  eyes  in 
place  of  nipples  (KG,  ii,  162). 

333.  Particularly  interesting  among  all  the  extraordinary  folk 
coming  under  our  ken  are  the  Amaaons,  whose  existence  is  believed 
in  among  the  Indians  even  up  to  the  present  day.  Several  legends,  of 
which  I  have  given  example  (Sect.  157),  bear  reference  to  them. 
Like,  many  another,  I  have  striven  in  vain  to  discover  the  exact 
whereabouts  of  these  valiant  females,  who,  though  cast  sufficiently 
in  the  Spartan  mold  to  amputate  the  right  breast  with  a  view  to 
insuring  greater  freedom  of  movement  for  the  arm  in  battling  upon 
the  Field  of  Mars,  were  nevertheless  women  enough  to  be  occasion- 
ally caught  napping  under  the  canopy  of  Venus.  The  Jesuit  Father 
Acuna  (164)  gives  the  accompanying  account  of  them;  he  appears 
to  have  been  more  fortunate  than  I. 

Up  the  River  Ounuiis  on  the  north  side  of  the  Amazon,  to  the  east  of  Toupinambou 
Island,  live  the  Apotos  [?Apautos],  the  Tagaris  [?Tagua-us],  and  lastly  the  Guacaras, 
who  are  the  people  that  have  the  Privilege  to  converse  with  these  valiant  Women 
and  enjoy  their  favors.  They  dwell  upon  huge  mountains:  one  that  lifts  its  Head 
a  great  height  above  all  the  rest  is  Yacamiaba.  These  women  (as  has  been  said)  are 
very  courageous  and  have  always  maintained  themselves  alone  without  the  help  and 
assistance  of  men;  and  when  their  neighbors  come  into  their  country  at  a  time  con- 
certed with  them,  they  receive  them  with  weapons  in  their  hands,  which  are  Bows 
and  Arrows,  and  which  they  exercise  as  if  they  were  going  against  their  enemies;  but 


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN   ETHNOLOGY  THIRTIETH  ANNUAL  REPORT     PLATE  7 


A   TOUVINGA,  OR   TWO-FINGERED   NEGRO 
(Alter  J.  J.  Hartslnek) 


BOTH]  MISCELLANEOUS  BELIEFS  365 

knowing  well  that  the  others  do  not  come  to  fight,  but  are  their  friends,  they  lay  down 
their  arms,  and  all  run  into  the  canoes  or  other  little  vessels  of  these  Indians,  and  each 
Amazone  takes  the  Hammock  (a  cotton  Bed  they  hang  up  to  sleep  in)  which  she  finds 
next  at  hand;  this  she  carries  home  [Sect.  !!7S]  and  hangs  up  in  a  place  where  the 
owner  of  it  may  know  it  again  when  he  comes;  after  which  she  receives  ViiTn  as  her 
guest,  and  treats  him  those  few  days  they  continue  together.  These  Indians  after- 
ward return  to  their  own  dwellings,  and  never  fail  to  make  this  voyage  every  year  at 
the  appointed  Time.  The  girls  which  they  bear  are  brought  up  by  their  motheis.  As 
for  the  male  children,  it  is  not  certain  what  they  do  with  them. 

Father  Acirna  saw  an  Indian  who  told  him  that  when  he  was  a  child 
he  was  with  his  father  at  such  an  interview,  and  assured  him  that  they 
gave  the  male  children  to  their  fathers  the  next  time  they  came  sub- 
sequent to  the  birth.  But  the  common  report  is  that  they  kill  all 
their  males  as  soon  as  they  are  bom.  Schomburgk  gives  us  the  fol- 
lowing particulars : 

334.  According  to  the  statements  of  Mahanarwa,  the  last  Kazike  of  the  Caribs, 
they  [Amazons]  live  at  a  place  on  the  River  Wara,  quite  enclosed  by  mountains,  to 
which  there  is  but  a  single  entrance:  he  also  mentions  the  tribe  which  the  Amazons 
annually  visit — ^it  is  the  Teyrous  or  Tairas  in  Cayenne.  Among  the  Makusis 

and  Arawaks,  we  found  the  accounts  of  the  Amazons  to  be  widely  scattered  . 
each  tribe,  however,  gives  a  different  locality  to  where  these  women  are  to  be  met 
with.  ...    An  Arawak  chief  told  me  that  his  brother,  who  lived  on  the  upper 
Mazaruni,  had  visited  them  on  one  occasion,  and  that  he  received  one  of  those  green 
stones  as  a  present  from  the  Wirisamoca,  as  he  called  these  Amazons.      [ScR,  n,  330.] 

There  are  three  opinions  worth  considering  as  to  the  origin  of  the 
myth,  those  of  Wallace,  Schombiu-gk,  and  Humboldt.  In  describing 
the  Indians  of  the  River  Uaupes,  Wallace  says: 

The  men,  on  the  other  hand,  have  the  hair  carefully  parted  and  combed  on  each 
side,  and  tied  in  a  queue  behind.  In  the  young  men,  it  hangs  in  long  locks  down  their 
necks,  and,  with  the  comb,  which  is  invariably  carried  stuck  in  the  top  of  the  head, 
gives  to  them  a  most  feminine  appearance:  this  is  increased  by  the  large  necklaces 
and  bracelets  of  beads,  and  the  careful  extirpation  of  every  symptom  of  beard.  Tak- 
ing these  circumstances  into  consideration,  I  am  strongly  of  opinion  that  the  story 
of  the  Amazons  has  arisen  from  these  feminine-looking  warriors  encountered  by  the 
early  voyagers.  I  am  inclined  to  this  opinion,  from  the  effect  they  first  produced 
on  myself,  when  it  was  only  by  close  examination  I  saw  that  they  were  men;  and, 
were  the  front  parts  of  their  bodies  and  their  breasts  covered  with  shields,  such  as 
they  always  tise,  I  am  convinced  any  person  seeing  them  for  the  first  time  would 
conclude  liiey  were  women.     [ARW,  343.] 

Schombm-gk  bases  the  fable  on  the  "warlike  reputation  of  the 
women  of  certain  tribes,  namely,  the  Caribs.  Columbus  in  his 
second  voyage  gives  proofs  of  the  courage  of  the  women  folk  of 
Guadalupe — and  Peter  Martyr  d'Anghieri  says  of  the  inhabitants  of 
this  island  that  both  sexes  possess  great  strength  and  skill  in  the  use 
of  the  bow  and  other  weapons.  .  .  .  Columbus  had  already  on  his 
first  voyage  found  fighting  women,  and  in  them  recognized  Ama- 
zons: what  had  been  told  him  in  the  old  world,  he  believed  to  find 
again  in  the  new"  (ScR,  ii,  330).      Humboldt  recognizes  a  motive 


366  ANIMISM   AND   FOLK-LOBE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS   [bth.  ANN.  30 

that  prompted  exaggeration  on  the  part  of  those  writers  of  the  six- 
teenth century  who  have  given  most  reputation  to  the  Amazons 
of  America,  in  their  tendency  to  find  among  the  newly  discovered 
nations  all  that  the  Greeks  have  related  to  us  of  the  first  age  of  the 
world,  and  of  the  manners  of  the  barbarous  Scythians  and  Africans 
(AVH,  II,  400). 

335.  The  orang-utang  of  Guiana,  as  we  are  told  with  all  due 
solemnity  by  Bancroft  (Ba,  130),  is  much  larger  than  either  the 
African  or  the  oriental,  if  the  accounts  of  the  natives  may  be  relied 
on.  He  does  not  find  that  any  specimens  have  been  seen  by  the 
white  inhabitants  on  this  coast,  whp  never  penetrate  far  into  the 
woods.  These  animals,  in  all  the  various  languages  of.  the  natives,  are 
called  by  names  signifying  a  wild  man.  They  are  represented  by  the 
Indians  as  being  near  five  feet  in  height,  maintaining  an  erect  posi- 
tion, and  having  a  human  form,  thinly  covered  with  short  black 
hair;  but  Bancroft  suspects  that  their  height  has  been  augmented  by 
the  fears  of  the  Indians,  who  greatly  dread  them,  and  instantly  flee 
as  soon  as  one  is  discovered,  so  that  none  of  them  has  ever  been 
taken  alive,  much  less  any  attempts  made  for  taming  them.  The 
Indians  relate  many  fabulous  stories  of  these  animals,  and,  like  the 
inhabitants  of  Africa  and  the  East,  assert  that  they  wiU  attack  the 
males  and  ravish  the  females  of  the  human  species.  It  is  to  be  noted 
that  this  author's  description  nearly  agrees  with  that  of  the  Spirits 
of  the  Forest,  the  Tukuyuha  of  the  Arawaks,  etc.  (Sect.  95). 

Humboldt  also  makes  mention,  on  the  Orinoco,  of  a — 

hairy  man  of  the  woods  called  salvaje,  that  carries  oft  women,  constructs  huts,  and 
sometimes  eats  human  flesh.  The  Tamanacs  call  him  achi,  and  the  Maypures  vasitri 
or  "great  devil."  The  natives  and  the  missionaries  have  no  doubt  of  the  existence 
of  this  man-shaped  monkey,  of  which  they  entertain  a  singular  dread.  Father  Gili 
gravely  relates  the  history  of  a  lady  in  the  town  of  San  Carlos,  in  the  Llanos  of 
Venezuela,  who  much  praised  the  gentle  character  and  attentions  of  the  man  of  the 
woods.  She  is  stated  to  have  lived  several  years  with  one  in  great  domestic  har- 
mony, and  only  requested  some  hunters  to  take  her  back,  "because  she  and  her 
children  (a  little  hairy  also)  were  weary  of  living  far  from  the  church  and  the  sacra- 
ments."   [AVH,  n,  270.] 

With  regard  to  the  black  monkey,  the  Arawaks  have  the  following 
proverb:  Ka'to  Tiure  hobaldi;  Jcenna  titina  JceheMi;  howajilida  (lit. 
"When  black  monkey  shot;  and  blood  licks;  Uvely,  active"),  refer- 
ring to  a  man  working  hard  (pullmg  a  paddle,  etc.)  all  day,  a  hint 
that  a  little  stimulant  (paiwarri)  will  revive  him. 

336.  The  Maroon  negroes  of  the  Maroni,  when  they  kill  a  howling 
monkey,  preserve  the  vocal  apparatus,  out  of  which  a  cup  is  made; 
if  a  child  is  given  Hs  drink  out  of  this  cup  for  some  months,  it  will  be 
cured  of  stammering  (Cr,  159).  Humboldt  was  told  by  his  guides 
[?  Indians]  that  to  cure  asthma  it  is  sufficient  to -drink  out  of  the 
bony  drum  of  the  hyoidal  bone  of  this  creature  (AVH,  ii,  70). 


BOTH]  MISCELLANEOUS  BELIEFS  367 

337.  I  am  afraicLthat  the  existence  of  a  Warracaba  tiger,  like  many 
another  quaint  conceit,  must  be  consigned  to  the  obhvion  of  super- 
stition. The  beUef  is  of  somewhat  local  origin  and  of  comparatively 
recent  date,  no  references  being  met  with  in  all  the  old  hterature  avail- 
able. It  is  very  probably  akin  to  the  many  other  mythical  "tigers" 
with  which  the  Indian  folk-lore  is  so  replete :  for  example,  the  Kanaima 
(Sect.  S20)  of  the  natives  generally,  the  Tobe-horoanna  (Sects.  I44, 
146,  148)  of  the  Warraus  particularly,  for  which  it  fulfills  a  somewhat 
similar  purpose.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  possible  that  the  myth 
has  its  origin  in  certain  indigenous  wild  dogs  which  hunt  in  packs. 
On  the  Quitaro  River,  some  Wapisiana  Indians  stated  that  the  jour- 
ney to  the  Ataraipu  Rock  and  back  would  have  to  be  accomplished 
in  one  day,  as  it  would  be  impossible  to  spend  a  night  near  the  rock, 
on  account  of  a  pack  of  Warracaba  tigers  that  inhabited  the  district 
(Bro,  149).  The  most  vivid  description  of  the  creature  comes  from 
the  pen  of  Barrington  Brown  (Bro,  72,  73,  74)  when  on  the  Mazaruni: 

I  eagerly  inqtiiied  what  were  Warracaba  tigers,  and  was  hastily  informed  that  they 
were  small  and  exceedingly  ferocious  tigers,  that  they  hunted  in  packs,  and  were  not 
frightened  by  camp-fires  or  anything  except  the  barking  of  dogs.  To  water  they  have 
a  special  aversion,  and  will  never  cross  a  stream  which  is  too  wide  for  them  to  jump. 
...  As  we  stopped,  a  shrill  scream  rent  the  night  air.  .  .  This  was  answered  by 
another  cry  coming  from  the  depths  of  the  forest,  the  interval  between  them  being 
filled  by  low  growls  and  trumpeting  sounds  which  smote  most  disagreeably  on  the  ear. 
.  .  .  The  call  of  these  animals  resembles  that  of  the  Warracaba  or  Trumpet-bird 
(Psopkia  crepitang)  .  .  .  and  hence  they  have  obtained  the  name  of  Warracaba  tigera. 
The  Ackawoise  Indians  call  them  "  Y'agamisheri,"  and  say  that  they  vary  in  size  as 
well  as  in  color.  As  many  as  a  hundred  are  said  to  have  been  seen  in  one  pack.  .  . 
They  are  said  to  frequent  the  mountains,  but  when  pressed  by  hunger  .  .  .  they 
descend  to  the  lowlands. 

Schomburgk  states  that  this  tiger  is  so  named  after  the  peculiar 
coloring  of  the  breast,  which  is  exactly  hke  the  feathers  of  the  trum- 
peter bird  (ScR,  11,  85) . 

338.  Speaking  of  "tigers"  generally,  it  is  almost  traditional  among 
the  Indians  that  each  of  the  various  kinds  of  tigers  and  tiger-cats 
hunts  one  kind  of  animal  in  particular,  the  call  of  which  it  can  imitate. 
The  Arawaks  have  a  saying,  Hamdro  Icamungka  turuwati  (ht.  "every- 
thing has  tiger"),  as  a  reminder  of  the  fact  that  we  should  be  cir- 
cumspect, and  on  our  guard,  there  always  being  some  enemy  about. 
It  is  a  general  beUef  among  the  Indians  and  the  white  inhabitants 
of  Brazil  that  the  on^a  (jaguar)  has  the  power  of  fascination  (ARW, 
317). 

339.  The  tapir  has  between  its  eyebrows  a  bone  so  strong  as  to 
enable  it  to  break  down  the  undergrowth  in  the  forests;  with  this 
means  of  defence  it  can  protect  itseK  from  a  tiger  by  crushing  the 
latter  against  the  rugged  timber,  and  so  tearing  it  to  pieces  (G,  i, 
265).    The  same  animal,  the  Rio  Xegro  Indians  say,  "has  a  pecviliar 


368  ANIMISM  AND  FOLK-LORE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS   [eth.  ANN.  30 

fancy  for  dropping  his  dung  only  in  the  water  (Sect.  162B),  and  they 
never  find  it  except  in  brooks  and  springs,  though  it  is  so  large  and 
abundant  that  it  could  not  be  overlooked  in  the  forest.  If  there  is 
no  water  to  be  found,  the  animal  makes  a  rough  basket  of  leaves  and 
carries  it  to  the  nearest  stream  and  there  deposits  it "  (ARW,  154) . 
On  the  upper  Essequibo  the  men  removed  the  hoofs  from  a  tapir 
for  the  purpose  of  using  them,  when  occasion  required,  as  charms  for 
bites  of  snakes,  stings  of  ray-fish,  and  fits  of  all  kinds :  they  said  that 
the  hoofs  are  first  singed,  and  then  placed  in  water,  which  is  drunk 
(Bro,  240) .  The  same  belief  was  current  on  the  Orinoco :  tapir  hoofs 
crushed  to  powder,  and  one  hung  on  the  neck  of  a  patient,  constitute 
an  excellent  and  well-known  cure  for  epilepsy  (G,  i,  265) .  The  rem- 
edy is  still  employed,  to  my  own  knowledge,  by  creole  residents  in 
Georgetown. 

340.  The  smaller  armadillo  {Dasypus  viMosus  Desm.),  the  jassi  of 
the  Makusis,  and  other  tribes,  according  to  the  Indians,  is  met  with 
only  on  the  savannahs  and  fives  chiefly  on  carrion.  Hence,  in  certain 
festival  songs  of  the  Wapisiana  and  Makusi  this  creature  plays  an 
important  r61e,  in  that  almost  every  refrain  ends  with  the  words, 
"And  when  I  am  dead,  put  me  in  the  savannah;  the  jassi  wiU 
come  and  bury  me."  According  to  Von  Martins  a  similar  song  is 
common  among  the  Indians  of  the  Kio  Negro  (ScR,  ii,  97-98) .  The 
last  joint  or  bone  of  the  armadillo's  tail  has  been  found  an  effica- 
cious remedy  for  earache  (G,  ii,  263),  but  whether  by  Indians 
or  by  Spaniards  unfortunately  is  not  stated.  The  real  interest  of 
the  connection  between  the  animal  and  the  complaint  lies  rather  in 
the  creature's  ears  being  so  distinctive  a  feature,  a  fact  to  which 
attention  has  already  been  drawn  in  dealing  with  its  bina  (Sect.  233) . 
Explanations  have  been  given  as  to  the  bush-master  snake  (Lachesis 
mutus)  being  always  found  in  armadillo  holes  (Sect.  7) . 

341.  Well  into  the  eighteenth  century  the  musk-gland  on  the 
dorsum  of  the  bush-hog  (Dicotyles)  was  beheved  to  be  its  navel  by 
Creoles  and  Europeans,  from  the  Orinoco  to  Cayeime,  though  the 
idea  does  not  seem  to  have  been  shared  by  the  Indians.  There  is 
one  particular  animal,  seemingly  of  a  skunk-like  nature  ( ?  Conepa- 
tus)  which  thus  far  has  baffled  me  in  the  way  of  identification. 
Father  Gumilla  (ii,  272)  describes  it  as  follows: 

A  little  animal,  very  scarce,  and  the  most  detestable  of  any  that  I  have  hitherto  seen. 
Amongst  the  whites  of  America  it  is  called  mapunto:  and  the  Indians  call  it  mafutili- 
qui:  it  is  like  one  of  those  very  elegant  little  mongrel  curs  which  ladies  breed  in  their 
mansions.  All  its  Uttle  body  is  spotted  white  and  black:  its  tail  proportionate, 
uncommon  {hermoso),  and  much  covered  with  long  hair:  very  active  and  flighty  in  its 
manner  of  walking,  aad  daring  beyond  measure.  It  waits  for  its  enemy,  tiger,  man 
or  animal,  face  to  face:  and  so  soon  as  it  is  approached  close  enough,'it  turns  its  back. 
The  atmosphere  is  rendered  so  pestiferous  that  the  enemy  remains  stupefied,  and 
requires  a  long  time  before  he  can  get  away. 


BOTH]  MISCELLANEOXTS  BELIEFS  369 

342.  The  Rio  Negro  Indians  declare  that  the  great  anteaters 
{MyrmecopJioga  juhata)  are  all  females  and  believe  that  the  male  is 
the  Cunipira,  or  demon  of  the  forest  (Sect.  117) :  the  peculiar  organi- 
zation of  the  animal  has  probably  led  to  this  error  (ARW,  314). 

343.  With  regard  to  the  sloth,  there  would  seem  to  be  but  few 
references  to  the  animal  in  Guiana  folk-lore.  I  have  already  men- 
tioned him  in  the  light  of  a  girl's  sweetheart  (Sect.  134),  and  the 
smaller  species  in  connection  with  a  death  omen  (Sect.  222) .  Arawaks 
say  Kdto  awaduli  fudi:  Tiau  akonaka  (Ut.  when  wind  blows,  sloth 
walks),  that  is,  people  are  going  to  exert  themselves  only  when  they 
are  obliged  to. 

344.  Anaong  the  Island  Caribs  the  tortoise  bore  a  reputation  for 
being  "smart."  One  of  the  most  offensive  things  they  could  say 
when  chaffing  one  another  was,  "You  are  as  wide-awake  (adroit)  as  a 
tortoise"  (RoP,  453),  though  the  same  authors  elsewhere  refer  to  its 
clumsiness  (lourdise)  and  stupidity  (RoP,  465) . 

345.  To  account  for  the  rough  stones  invariably  found  in  the  belly 
of  the  alligator,  the  Otomac  Indians  were  of  opinion  that,  as  the 
creature  increases  in  size  it  finds  a  corresponding  difficulty  in  sink- 
ing to  the  bottom  of  the  river  on  the  sands  on  which  it  sleeps, 
covered  with  all  the  weight  of  the  waters;  and  that,  guided  by 
instinct,  it  proceeds  to  the  banks,  where  it  swallows  as  many  stones 
as  may  be  necessary  to  weigh  it  down;  whence,  it  may  be  inferred 
that  the  bigger  it  grows,  the  more  stones  are  required  for  its  ballast 
and  counterpoise  (G,  ii,  215).  But  in  those  rivers  where  there  are 
Tio  stones,  to  effect  its  purpose  of  sinking  to  the  bottom  the  alligator 
retains  the  bones  of  the  animals  which  it  has  devoured  (G,  n,  218). 
According  to  Indian  accoimts  the  seat  of  life  {der  Sitz  des  Lebens)  is 
situated  in  the  animal's  tail.  That  the  tail  is  the  most  sensitive 
part  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  with  every  blow  thereon  the  creature 
rears  up,  though  it  will  hardly  respond  to  a  cudgeling  on  the  head 
and  back  (ScR,  II,  177). 

346.  Indians  and  colored  people  consider  the  gecko,  the  "wood- 
slave"  of  the  colonists  (Hemidactylus  Mabouia  Cuv.,  and  Platydactylus 
TheconyxDxim.),  as  poisonous  as  their  snakes.  They  believe  that  if 
a  gecko  fall  from  the  roof  or  beams  on  the  bare  skin  of  a  person,  the 
latter  will  be  seized  with  convulsions,  which  will  soon  be  followed  by 
death(ScR,  II,  116). 

347.  Throughout  many  races  of  mankind  the  snake  has  played  a 
very  important  r6le  in  connection  with  sexual  matters.  Several 
references  on  this  score  are  to  be  met  with  in  the  animism  of  the 
Guiana  Indian,  but  a  few  wiU  suffice  for  present  purposes.  The 
snake  appears  as  the  husband  or  lover  (Sects.  23,  47,  56,  363),  is 
especially  fond  of  the  women  at  their  menstrual  periods  (Sects.  55, 
188   274),  and  not  infrequently  may  be  foimd  actually  inside  the 

15961° — 30  ETH — 15 24 


370  ANIMISM   AND   FOLK-LOBE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS   [eth.  ann.  30 

female  (Sects.  SI,  55,  56).  He  is  also  the  progenitor  of  the  human 
race  (Sects.  64-,  55),  the  soiirce  of  origin  of  all  the  binas  (Sect.  2S5), 
and  his  skia  has  given  their  natural  color  to  all  the  birds  (Sect.  162). 
For  reasons  already  given  (Sect.  64),  he  is  symbolic  of  everlasting  life. 
Certain  snake  dances  have  been  referred  to  (Sect.  4-7) .  There  is  also 
a  connection  between  snakes  and  rain  (Sect.  21S). 

348.  There  are  one  or  two  curious  beliefs  concerning  the  camudi 
snake,  or  6mo,  of  the  Orinoco.  The  Jirara  Indians  designated  it 
aviofa,  but  other  tribes,  and  the  Indians  of  Quito,  named  it  "  water- 
mamma"  {madre  del  agua)  because  it  ordinarily  lives  in  the  water. 
This  is  how,  a  couple  of  centuries  ago,  the  camudi  was  believed  to 
capture  its  prey: 

As  soon  as  it  hears  a  noise,  it  raises  its  head,  and  a  yard  or  two  of  its  body,  and  when 
it  seesitsprey,  be  it  tiger,  calf,  deer,  or  man,  it  takes  aim,  and  opening  its  terrible  mouth, 
emits  so  poisonous  and  foul  an  exhalation  as  to  fix  the  victim,  stupefy  him,  and  render 
him  unable  to  move.  For  this  reason,  no  one  dares  to  travel  alone  by  himself,  either 
for  fishing  or  hunting,  no  matter  where  the  journey  may  be:  at  least  two  have  to  go  in 
company,  so  that  in  case  the  buio,  hidden  or  discovered,  should  take  aim  at  one  of 
them,  the  other,  either  with  his  hat,  or  with  a  tree-branch,  will  shake  and  cut  the  air 
intervening  between  his  friend  and  the  monster.     [G,  n,  148.] 

With  regard  to  the  foul  exhalation  just  referred  to,  it  is  curious 
to  note  Schomburgk's  remark  concerning  the  coulacanara  [kole- 
konaro  (Sect.  ^S5)]  boa-constrictor:  "If  any  one  approaches  the  crea- 
ture when  hissing,  he  is  met  with  a  musky,  kind  of  stench"  (ScR,  ii, 
250).  Bancroft  tells  us  that  the  white  inhabitants  of  the  colony 
spoke  of  the  camudi  by  the  name  of  Sodomite  Snake  owing  to  the 
peculiar  manner  in  which  it  was  believed  by  the  Indians  to  kill  its 
prey  when  larger  than  a  duck  or  goose,  namely,  by  inserting  its  pointed 
tail  into  the  creature's  rectum  (Ba,  205);  this  extraordinary  belief  I 
have  found  existing  among  the  present  day  Pomeroon  Arawaks. 

349.  Mention  has  been  made  of  the  frog  being  regarded  in  the  light 
of  a  divinity  by  the  original  Carib  tribes  in  the  way  of  sending  rain 
or  fine  weather,  of  its  being  kept  as  a  domestic  animal,  and  whipped 
when  the  wishes  of  the  votaries  were  not  fulfilled  (Sect.  46).  The 
frog  is  very  generally  spoken  of  as  a  female  (Sects.  12,  24) ;  she  it  was 
who  brought  fire  out  of  her  mouth  (Sect.  34),  food-starch  and  cassava 
out  of  her  neck  and  shoulders  (Sects.  34,  37),  taught  music  (Sect.  12), 
and  showed  folk  how  to  hunt  (Sects.  12,  I44,  I45).  As  a  preparatory 
charm  for  hunting,  she  is  accordingly  employed,  either  by  being 
swallowed  or  by  bemg  rubbed  mto  the  incisions  made  on  the  hunter 
(Sects.  228,  229).  She  is  depicted  on  the  neck-ornament  of  the 
medicine-man  (Sect.  292).  One  particular  frog  is  used  by  pregnant 
Arawak  women  as  an  omen  (Sect.  ' 


s  moShTNorL'^'a'l^  '"'"""  *'''  '"^  ''  '•"'  '^P^«=»"*^'i  »«  ^teali^  ^^^  A",  and  bringing  it  away  in 


its  moutli  (Nor,  254,  314). 


BOTH]  MISCELLANEOUS  BELIEFS  371 

350.  The  b<iDia,  or  "stinking  bird"  (Ostinops  spp.)  is  believed  to 
produce  the  aerial  roots  of  the  kofa  tree  {CliLsia  grandifolia),  an  epi- 
phyte, which  are  supposed  to  be  its  castings  turned  into  wood  (Sects. 
138,  168) :  the  natural  "stench"  of  the  bird's  feathers  may  have  had 
something  to  do  wilh  the  origin  of  the  idea.  The  same  bird  is  repre- 
sented as  removing  the  snake  from  out  of  the  plum-tree  woman  (Sect. 
SI),  and  also  as  a  transformed  medicine-man  (Sect.  loJi).  The  tiki- 
tiki  is  a  fabulous  bird  mentioned  by  Humboldt  as  the  enemy  of  the 
himaan  race,  which  causes  the  deformities  of  newly-bom  children 
(AVH,  II,  249) :  it  is  also  referred  to  by  Schomburgk  as  tigtitig  (Sect. 
82).  Macaws  are  believed  to  advise  and  assist  the  Water  Spirits  in 
upsetting  the  canoes  (Sect.  179).  There  is  a  Pomeroon  Arawak 
belief  that  the  tiriliana,  the  "corn-bird,"  is  too  lazy  to  look  after  its 
own,  and  therefore  lays  its  eggs  in  the  nest  of  the  mockingbird  (Cow- 
sicus),  which  does  the  hatching  for  it.  A  similar  remark  applies, 
among  these  same  people,  to  the  werebekwa,  a  very  small  creature  that 
deposits  its  eggs  in  the  nest  of  ahimamingbird,  which  it  thereupon  drives 
away.  The  caution  of  the  goat-sucker  (Caprirrndgus)  makes  the  Wapi- 
sianas  declare  that  this  bird  carries  another  pair  of  eyes  on  its  back 
(ScR,  II,  61).  Goat-suckers  are  always  birds  of  ill-omen  (Sect.  223). 
The  vulture  is  very  reasonably  known  as  the  "boss,  or  governor,"  of 
the  carrion-crows  (Sect.  1S7).  Among  the  Indians  hummingbirds  are 
proverbially  exceedingly  quarrelsome  (Be,  11).  There  are  several 
allusions  in  the  literature  to  the  natural  association  of  humming- 
birds with  tobacco,  not  only  because  these  little  creatures  nest  in 
this  particular  plant  (RoP,  114,  178),  but  also  because  they  possess 
a  peculiarly  pleasant  smell  (ibid.,  177).  It  is  quite  common  to  hear 
the  hummingbird  spoken  of  by  Arawaks  and  Warraus  as  the  "doctor's 
bird,"  for  a  similar  reason,  the  tobacco  plant  having  been  brought 
into  great  prominence  by  the  medicine-men,  and  having  been  intro- 
duced among  these  tribes  by  the  little  creature  just  mentioned 
(Sect.  296). 

351.  The  curbinata,  so  named  by  the  Spaniards,  is  a  fish  found  in 
the  Orinoco,  but  it  is  not  so  much  as  an  article  of  subsistence  that  it 
is  valued,  as  on  account  of  two  stones  in  its  head,  exactly  in  the  place 
which  is  usually  occupied  by  the  brain.  These  stones,  which  are 
regarded  as  a  specific  in  cases  of  retention  of  urine  [?by  Indians  or 
Spaniards],  sell  for  their  weight  in  gold  (FD,  150).  I  have  known  of 
Arawaks  sticking  a  sting-ray  (Raja)  barb  into  the  aching  hoUow,  to 
relieve  toothache. 

351A.  Spider-webs  must  evidently  have  been  formerly  of  immense 
size  to  allow  of  people  climbing  down  them  (Sect.  142),  and  strong 
enough  to  support  a  fallen  tree  (Sect.  SOO). 


Chapter  XX  ■• 

ANIMISM  AND  FOLK-TALES  OF  EECENT  INTRODUCTION; 
MIXED  FOREIGN  AND  INDIGENOUS  BELIEFS 

The  Story  of  "Brer  Rabbit"  {S52-S62),  and  other  Tales  (36S-S64). 

353.  There  are  many  stories  current  of  undoubted  foreign  origin, 
chiefly  African,  modified  more  or  less  by  local  conditions.  Among 
these  are  the  celebrated  adventures  of  Brer  Rabbit,  who,  through  the 
Spanish  form  of  the  word  (conejo)  is  here  known  as  Koneso  (Arawak), 
or  Konehu  (Warrau).  The  Warraus  apply  the  term  to  any  "smart" 
man,  indeed  to  any  knave  or  rogue  who  is  always  outwitting  his 
neighbors.  Both  nations  claim  the  hero  as  their  own,  the  Arawaks 
even  crediting  themselves  with  his  long  ears,  and  it  was  from  these 
two  sources  that  I  was  able  to  glean  the  details  given  here. 

The  Stoet  of  Koneso  (Beer  Rabbit) 

353.  There  was  once  a  Koneso;  but  although  he  was  a  rabbit,  he  had  short  ears 
just  like  any  other  person.  He  traveled  about  all  over  the  country,  and  he  had 
plenty  of  children  everywhere.  Yes;  he  gave  a  lot  of  trouble  to  the  single  girls, 
and  upset  the  harmony  of  many  a  married  man's  home.  If  the  other  men  aimed 
at  him  with  a  club  or  with  an  arrow,  it  would  either  glide  off  or  break,  and  Koneso 
would  laugh.  They  found  they  could  not  kill  him,  and  he  continued  doing  just 
what  he  liked.  But  at  last  he  himself  got  tired  of  everybody,  and  went  away  to 
another  country.  Now,  the  country  he  went  to  was  ruled  by  a  nafudi,'  who  was 
celebrated  as  having  a  very  beautiful  daughter.  Koneso  happened  to  see  this  lovely 
woman  one  day,  and  forthwith  went  and  asked  the  father  to  give  her  to  him  for  a 
wife.  But  the  nafudi  told  him  he  must  first  of  all  bring  him  two  quakes  full  of  alli- 
gator and  camudi  eyes.  So,  Koneso  retired  to  make  the  quakes,  and  spent  some 
days  in  arranging  for  the  manufacture  of  cassiri..  With  the  cassiri  he  filled  plenty 
of  jugs  and  brought  them  down  to  the  waterside,  close  to  the  river  bank.  He  next 
took  his  bone  flute  and  played  pretty  music — it  was  such  pretty  music  that  all  the 
alligators  and  camudis  came  out  of  the  water  to  listen  to  it.  He  then  handed  the 
drinks  round  in  a  calabash,  made  them  intoxicated,  and  while  they  were  all  lying 
dead  drunk  there,  he  gouged  their  eyes  out  with  his  finger.  Having  filled  his  quakes 
with  their  eyes,  he  hurried  back  with  them  to  the  nafudi,  but  the  latter  said,  "I 
can  not  let  anyone  like  you  have  my  daughter.  Hang  your  impudence!"  And  with 
this,  he  pulled  sharply  at  Koneso's  ears.^  But  with  the  pull,  Koneso's  ears  got 
stretched  and  hung  down  a  good  way  over  his  neck.  When  Koneso  found  that  he 
had  now  got  long  ears,  he  became  very  angry,  and  told  the  nafudi  he  would  show 
him  what  he  could  do.  Whereupon,  he  began  attempting  to  take  liberties  with  the 
pretty  daughter,  but  the  more  she  screamed,  the  more  he  laughed;  and  every  stick 
that  the  nafudi  beat  him  with  got  broken  immediately  it  touched  his  skin.  When 
the  uafudi  saw  that  he  could  not  hurt  Koneso  this  way,  he  told  his  men  to  seize  him, 

1  Nafudi  is  the  Arawak  term  for  the  head  of  a  settlement,  for  a  "boss,"  and  used  to  be  applied  to  a  chief- 
tain or  cacique,  in  the  same  sense  that  it  would  be  and  still  is  applied  to  the  King  or  to  the  Governor. 

!  It  is  a  common  trick  for  the  Indians  to  give  a  sharp  downward  tug  on  their  children's  ears  when  the 
youngsters  are  naughty  or  disobedient. 

372 


»oTH]  INTBUSIVE  BELIEFS  AND  TALES  373 

to  tie  him  up  against  a  tree,  and  shoot  him  at  close  range:  but  every  arrow  that  was 
shot  either  got  broken  or  gknced  off.  The  men  thereupon  put  Koneso  in  a  corial 
and  tied  him  on  to  the  benches,  put  up  an  ite  sail,  and  let  the  vessel  drift  out  to  sea: 
but  Koneso  soon  released  himself,  sailed  back  again,  and  went  to  the  nafudi  and  told 
him  that  he  had  brought  the  boat  sate  into  port.  The  men  thereupon  seized  Koneso 
a  third  time;  they  tied  him  hand  and  foot,  fixed  around  his  neck  a  long  vine-rope 
with  a  heavy  stone  attached,  took  him  out  to  sea,  and  threw  him  overboard;  but  as 
soon  as  Koneso  touched  ground,  he  "loosed  himself,"  and  resting  the  heavy  stone 
on  his  shoulder  walked  along  the  bottom  of  the  sea  until  he  reached  shore,  when 
he  reported  himself  again  to  the  nafudi;  and  told  him  that  he  had  brought  back  the 
stone  quite  safe.  To  make  a  long  story  short,  the  nafudi  recognizing  his  helplessness, 
gave  Koneso  his  daughter. 

354.  Koneso  after  a  time  got  homesick,  and  came  back  to  his  own  country.  He 
went  one  day  deep  into  the  forest  and  began  to  pull  the  big  vine-ropes  from  ofi  the 
trees.  Tiger  heard  him,  and  coming  up,  asked  him  what  all  the  noise  was  about. 
"Nothing,"  said  Koneso,  "except  that  there  will  be  a  big  wind  blowing  the  day 
after  tomorrow,  and  as  I  don't  want  to  be  blown  away,  I  intend  tying  myself  up  to  a 
tree  with  one  of  these  vines."  Tiger  became  much  frightened  at  hearing  all  this,  and 
begged  Koneso  to  tie  him  up  before  he  fixed  himself  in  safety.  After  Koneso  had 
accordingly  boimd  him  up  tight  against  a  tree,  he  went  away  and  started  cutting  down 
some  more  vine-rope,  making  plenty  of  noise  over  it,  just  to  make  believe  that  he 
was  going  to  treat  himself  in  the  same  manner.  But  instead  of  that,  he  just  quietly 
walked  home  again.  In  the  meantime  Tiger  waited  patiently  for  the  three  days  to 
pass,  and  no  wind  came  at  all,  and  he  began  to  feel  hungry,  but  tug  and  pull  as  hard 
as  he  could,  he  was  ujaable  to  loose  himself.  Many  animals  passed  by,  and  though 
he  begged  each  and  every  one  to  undo  the  ropes,  they  were  all  afraid  lest,  once  freed, 
Tiger  might  eat  them  after  so  long  a  fast.  At  last,  on  the  fourth  day,  a  carrion-crow 
came  hopping  along,  and  Tiger  promised  him  that  if  he  untied  him  he  would  in 
future  always  give  him  some  meat  to  eat.  Thereupon  the  bird  released  him,  and 
this  is  why,  whenever  Tiger  kills  game,  he  always  leaves  behind  something  for  the 
carrion-crow  to  peck  at. 

355.  Some  time  after.  Tiger  met  Koneso  and  told  him  that  he  was  going  to  kill 
him  for  playing  such  a  trick.  But  Koneso  begged  so  hard,  saying  that  he  was  only 
skin  and  bones,  and  that  even  if  he  ate  him,  he  would  not  satisfy  his  hunger,  that 
Tiger  spared  his  life,  but  all  the  same  was  determined  upon  catching  him  again  in 
another  manner.  Now,  Tiger  knew  the  pond  where  Koneso  used  to  bathe,  so  without 
saying  anything  to  anybody,  he.  climbed  up  into  the  branches  of  an  overhanging 
tree,  and  patiently  waited  for  his  prey  to  come  along,  when  he  would  jump  upon 
his  back  and  kill  him.  But  Koneso  had  been  to  a  drink-party,  and,  decked  with 
flowers  over  his  head,  around  his  neck,  his  chest  and  waist,  came  sauntering  leisurely 
along.  With  all  these  flowers  he  looked  like  some  other  animal,  and  Tiger  did  not 
recognize  him.  As  Koneso  came  out  of  his  bath,  however,  he  happened  to  look  up 
and  noticed  Tiger  crouching  along  one  of  the  upper  branches  at  the  same  time  that 
Tiger,  seeing  his  face,  recognized  him.  Tiger  then  made  a  spring,  but  not  quite 
fast  enough,  because 'Koneso  was  already  ofi.  For  a  long  distance  they  thus  ran, 
one  after  the  other,  and  just  in  the  nick  of  time  Koneso  escaped  into  an  armadillo 
hole.  This  hole  was  too  small  for  Tiger  to  chase  him,  so  he  made  up  his  mind  to 
close  it  altogether.  Near  by  there  was  a  hawk:  one  of  those  hawks  which  cry  tau-a 
tau-a  in  the  early  morning  before  the  sun  shines.  Tiger  called  to  the  bird  and  asked 
her  to  watch  at  the  armadillo  hole  while  he  went  home  to  fetch  a  digging-stick. 
While  Tiger  was  gone,  and  the  hawk  was  keeping  watch,  Koneso  came  up  to  the 
mouth  of  the  hole  and  started  whispering  sweet  nothings  to  her,'  flattering  her  with 
honeyed  words,  and  among  other  things  said:  "You  are  indeed  a  pretty  woman. 


374  ANIMISM   AND   FOLK-LOEE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS    [bth.  ank.  30 

Do  bend  your  face  down  a  bit.  I  would  so  love  to  see  it  closer."  And  when  the  silly 
hawk  bent  her  face  down,  Koneso  immediately  threw  a  handful  of  sand  into  her 
eyes,  and  so  blinded  her,  which  gave  him  the  opportunity  of  getting  away  from  Tiger.' 
366.  There  was  once  a  celebrated  Konehu,  walking  along  the  bush,  when  he  met 
a  female  Tiger.  The  latter,  who  was  hungry,  wanted  to  go  out  hunting,  but  did  not 
like  to  leave  her  three  little  cubs  at  home  without  anyone  in  charge  of  the  place. 
So  Konehu  agreed  to  look  after  the  youngsters  while  Tiger  searched  for  game.  Things 
went  on  very  well  for  some  time,  Tiger  returning  home  each  evening  with  meat  which 
she  shared  with  Konehu.  But  on  a  certain  day,  one  of  the  cubs  bit  Konehu,  so  he 
killed  it,  threw  the  body  away,  and  said  nothing  to  the  mother  when  she  returned. 
In  fact,  Konehu  as  usual  brought  from  out  of  the  hollow  log  one  cub  after  another  for 
the  mother  to 'suckle,  but  on  this  occasion  he  brought  out  the  same  cub  twice,  and 
the  mother  was  none  the  wiser.  Next  day,  another  cub  bit  Konehu.  So  he  killed 
it,  threw  the  body  away  as  before,  and  said  nothing,  but  in  the  evening  brought 
out  the  remaining  cub  three  times  to  be  fed,  and  its  mother  was  none  the  wiser. 
Next  day,  however,  the  surviving  whelp  bit  Konehu.  So  he  killed  it,  left  its  car- 
cass close  by  the  hollow  log,  and  made  tracks  elsewhere ."  He  knew  that  Tiger 
would  follow  him,  so  he  traveled  a  long,  long  way  before  he  rested.  He  next  built 
a  house  on  very  high  posts,  posts  too  high  for  anyone  to  climb  up,  and  then 
started  making  the  roof  which  was  just  as  high  up  again.  Indeed,  to  get  up  all 
that  way,  he  built  a  long  ladder.  And  he  started  tying  on  the  thatch.  In  the  mean- 
time. Tiger,  on  her  return  home,  found  her  one  dead  cub  but  no  signs  of  the  other 
two.  There  was  also  no  Konehu.  She  therefore  was  vexed  much,  and  determiiied 
to  follow  and  kill  him.  She  traveled  night  and  day,  and  went  on  and  on  until  she 
came  to  the  house  which- Konehu  was  building,  and  there  she  saw  him  on  top  thatching 
the  roof.  "Hullo!"  she  growls,  "What  are  you  doing  up  there?  ■  I  am  come  to  eat 
you."  But  Konehu  does  not  worry  himself.  He  only  says:  "You  had  better  look 
out  for  yourself,  because  there  is  a  big  sea  coming.  I  am  building  this  house  to  save 
myself.  You  had  better  join  me.  Come  up  the  ladder."  Tiger  thereupon  clambers 
up  the  ladder  and  gets  close  to  Konehu  who  is  tying  on  the  thatch  with  the  itiriti 
strand.  As  soon  as  she  got  too  uncomfortably  close  to  him,  he  suddenly  exclaimed: 
"Oh!  What  a  pity!  I  have  just  dropped  a  piece  of  the  tying  strand.  Wait  up  here 
a  minute,  while  I  go  down  and  fetch  it."  This  was  a  lie,  for  directly  he  reached  the 
ground,  he  removed  the  ladder,  leaving  Tiger  helpless  on  the  roof.  Again  Konehu 
made  tracks  and  walked  about.  He  walked  so  far  that  he  got  tired.  He  then  sat 
down  and  started  making  a  quake,  an  openwork  basket.  Now,  what  did  Tiger  do? 
When  she  found  the  ladder  gone,  she  scrambled  up  and  under  the  roof,  over  and 
among  the  beams  and  rafters,  but  she  could  not  get  down.  At  last,  hunger  compelled 
her  to  say,  "I  must  live,  or  I  must  die."  So  she  made  a  big  jump  and  reached  the 
ground  safely.  She  was  vexed  much,  and  determined  upon  following  and  killing 
Konehu.  She  traveled  night  and  day,  and  went  on  and  on  until  she  reached  the 
spot  where  Konehu  was  seated,  busily  occupied  in  making  his  quake.  "Hullol" 
she  growls,  "What  are  you  doing?  I  am  come  to  eat  you."  Konehu  however  re- 
mained quite  cool  and  quiet.  He  stuck  to  his  story  about  the  big  sea  coming,  and 
swore  that  he  was  making  the  quake  so  that  when  completed  he  could  get  inside  and 
haul  himself  up  to  the  topmost  branch  of  a  big  mora  tree  that  was  close  by.  SUly 
Tiger  then  believed  what  he  told  her,  and  said  she  would  like  to  get  into  the  basket 
also.  Konehu  therefore  took  her  measure  and  increased  the  size  of  the  basket.  When 
finished,  he  told  her  to  get  inside,  but  no  sooner  had  she  comfortably  fixed  herself 

1  The  rest  of  this  story  is  fairly  simUar  to  the  following  Warrau  version. 

2  In  the  Arawak  version  of  the  story  as  told  on  the  Pomeroon,  the  slaughter  of  all  three  youngsters  is 
wUfully  done  on  the  one  occasion  by  throwing  them  into  boiling  water  in  a  pot,  which  the  miscreant  covers 
with  a  baking-stone. 


BOTH]  IJTTRUSIVE   BELIEFS   AND   TALES  375 

than  he  drew  the  sides  of  the  quake  together,  and  sewed  them  up.  Tiger  was  now 
prisoner.  Fixing  a  long  vine-rope  to  the  basket,  Konehu  threw  it  over  the  topmost 
branch  of  the  mora  tree,  pulled  on  its  free  end,  left  his  victim  dangling  in  mid-air, 
and  made  tracks.  Tiger  was  now  in  a  bad  way,  for  the  more  she  roared  the  more  did 
all  the  other  animals  get  frightened  and  run  away.  At  last,  one  of  the  most  inquisitive, 
a  little  monkey,  wanting  to  know  what  all  the  noise  was  about,  climbed  down  the  vine- 
rope  and  opened  the  basket.  No  sooner  had  he  done  so,  than  out  jumped  Tiger  and 
both  fell  to  the  ground,  where  the  monkey's  only  reward  was  to  be  eaten.  Yes, 
Tiger  was  vexed  much  and  determined  upon  following  and  THHiTig  Konehu.  She 
wandered  on  and  on,  and  at  last  met  him  upon  the  banks  of  a  river.  Directly  he 
saw  her  coming  he  commenced  looking  down  into  the  water  very  hard,  as  if  he  wae 
examining  something  very  carefully.  "Hullo!"  growled  Tiger.  "What  are  you 
looking  at?  I  am  come  to  eat  you."  "Nonsense,  woman,"  says  Konehu.  "Look, 
look  down  there.  Don't  you  see  that  beautiful  yellow  stone  [gold]?  If  you  could 
only  fetch  it  you  would  be  a  rich  woman.  You  would  have  a  new  husband,  and  get 
new  cubs.'"  Now  what  he  was  pointing  at  in  the  water  was  only  the  reflection  of 
the  sun  overhead.  Tiger,  however,  being  both  silly  and  greedy,  dived  in,  and  quickly 
came  up  to  the  surface  to  breathe.  "Oh! "  he  tells  her,  "you  must  go  down  deeper." 
So  she  jumps  in  again,  and  stays  under  much  longer.  When  she  again  appears  on  the 
surface,  Konehu  reiterates  "You  haven't  gone  deep  enough."  And  so  the  game  goes 
on,  she  being  fooled  every  time  about  not  having  stayed  below  long  enough.  She 
makes  a  last  effort  to  dive  under  a  very  long  time,  when  Konehu  takes  the  opportunity 
of  making  good  his  escape.  Tiger  now  sees  that  she  has  been  tricked.  She  is  vexed 
much  and  is  more  than  ever  determined  to  follow  and  kill  Konehu,  who  by  this  time 
knows  what  to  expect.  So  he  travels  far,  far  until  he  comes  to  a  high  hill  on  the  top 
of  which  he  balances  a  big  rock,  and  at  the  bottom  of  which  he  digs  a  deep  pit.  By 
and  by.  Tiger  comes  along,  and  seeing  Konehu  on  top  of  the  hill,  looks  up  at  him 
and  says:  "Hullo!  What  are  you  doing  up  there?  I  am  come  to  eat  you."  But 
Konehu  puts  his  arms  around  the  rock,  and  says  it  is  a  large  piece  of  meat,  which  he 
will  throw  down  to  her  if  she  lies  quietly  in  tlje  pit.  And  the  siUy,  greedy  Tiger 
believes  him  again,  does  just  what  he  tells  her,  and  waits  for  the  meat  to  come.  Soon, 
bumpty,  bumpty,  down  the  hill  comes  the  big  rock,  faster  and  faster  it  speeds,  until 
falling  on  Tiger,  it  kills  and  buries  her.* 

357.  Konehu  was  a  lazy  man,  and  would  not  labor  for  his  living.  He  was  hungry. 
One  fine  morning  he  sat  at  the  foot  of  a  high  overhanging  cliff,  waiting  for  some  one 
to  come  along.  By  and  by  he  saw  a  company  of  men  approaching.  They  had  been 
out  hunting,  and  were  bringing  along  a  quantity  of  game.  Konehu  then  picked  up 
a  long  wooden  pole,  and  placing  it  against  the  side  of  the  cliff  after  the  manner  of  a 
brace  began  pressing  it  into  position  just  as  the  huntsmen  came  up.  In  reply  to 
their  inquiry  as  to  why  he  was  pressing  so  hard  upon  the  pole,  Konehu  said:  "Can't 
you  see  that  the  moimtain  is  falling  over,  and  that  if  I  don't  brace  it  up,  it  will  come 
down  and  destroy  all  of  us?  Look  up  and  see  it  moving!  Come,  take  my  place,  and 
let  me  have  a  little  rest.  I  have  been  sho\'ing  at  it  all  the  morning."  The  huntsmen 
accordingly  gazed  up  the  wall  of  the  precipice,  and  seeing  the  clouds  moving  over 
the  top  of  it,  indeed  thought  that  the  cliff  was  about  to  fall.  So  dropping  their  quarry 
on  the  ground,  they  all  together  started  pressing  on  the  timber,  and  continued  pressing, 
and  pressed  harder,  imtil  by  the  time  the  sim  was  about  to  sink,  they  were  so  exhausted 
that  they  could  press  no  longer.  They  satisfied  their  conscience  by  saying  that 
whether  the  cliff  overwhelmed  them  or  not,  it  would  not  be  their  fault.    They  there- 


1  The  exploit  of  the  yellow  stone  in  the  water  has  been  met  with  only  in  the  Pomeroon  Warrau  version 

°  «  From'cayenne  comes  a  variation  of  the  story  of  the  Tiger  in  a  pit,  covered  over  with  a  stone  (Coo,  I, 
272-^). 


376  ANIMISM  AND   FOLK-LOEE   OF   GUIANA  INDIA]^S   [bth.  ann.  30 

fore  let  go  the  timber  and  tximed  around  to  pick  up  all  their  game  and  provisions. 
But  these  had  all  disappeared.    And  so  had  Konehu! 

358.  On  another  occasion  Konehu  was  again  hungry,  but  the  people  all  about  knew 
what  a  tricky  man  he  was,  and  refused  to  give  him  anything  to  eat,  unless  he  paid 
or  worked  for  it.  He  had  nothing  to  give,  so  he  had  to  work.  He  asked  for-  food  at 
a  certain  house,  and  the  house-master  told  him  to  pound  some  rice.  He  pounded 
away  until  late  in  the  afternoon.  The  master  came  to  see  how  much  rice  had  been 
cleaned,  but  was  astonished  to  find  so  small  an  amount  resulting  from  the  lai^ 
quantity  that  had  been  handed  over  in  the  morning.  The  master  gave  Konehu  the 
same  quantity  to  pound  next  day.  and  in  the  afternoon  there  was  again  a  marked 
shortage,  so  he  became  very  angry  and  sent  Konehu  away.  That  very  night,  Konehu 
cooked  rice  for  supper.  Instead  of  a  solid  heavy-wood  pounder,  he  had  used  a  hollow- 
bamboo  one,  and  the  more  he  pounded  the  rice  with  it,  the  quicker  it  became  filled.' 

359.  An  exploit  next  takes  place  wherein  our  friend  Konehu  fools  a  fellow-traveler 
over  some  kokerite  seeds  (Maximiliana  regia).  He  was  sitting  on  a  rock  one  day 
eating  kokerite  nuts.  Holding  them  in  close  proximity  to  his  crutch,  he  was  breaking 
them  on  the  hard  surface  with  a  stone.  While  eating  the  kernels,  a  traveler  passed, 
and  the  latter  was  invited  to  taste  them.  He  ate  with  great  gusto,  and  asked  Konehu 
what  they  were. ^  "Eheu,  edo  testiculos  meos.  Quare  nonne  edes  tuoes,"  inquit. 
Itaque  hostes,  testiculos  suos  prehens,  lapide  pulsavit,  atque  tanto  modo  se  vul- 
neravit  ut  morietur. 

360.  One  day  Konehu  met  a  man  carrying  two  quakes  of  yams.  The  yams  looked 
just  splendid,  and  Konehu,  not  having  any  of  his  own,  determined  on  possessing  him- 
self of  them.  "Those  are  fine  yams,"  he  said,  "what  are  you  going  to  do  with  them?" 
On  learning  that  they  were  being  taken  up  the  river  for  sale  at  the  next  settlement, 
Konehu  said  that  he  knew  of  another  settlement  where  such  beautiful  yams  would 
fetch  a  far  higher  price,  and  that  it  they  were  handed  over  to  his  care  he,  Konehu, 
would  negotiate  the  business  to  the  better  advantage  just  for  friendship's  sake.  Once 
they  were  in  his  possession,  however,  Konehu  said  good-by  to  the  stranger,  and  brought 
them  home  for  his  wife  to  cook.  AU  that  he  had  said  about  selling  them  at  a  big 
price  was  a  lie.  Soon  after  the  very  same  man  whom  he  had  cheated  came  up  to  the 
house  and  threatened  to  kill  him.  But  Konehu  managed  to  talk  "sweet-mouth" 
and  soothed  his  anger  by  telling  him  that  if  he  waited  a  while,  he  would  give  him 
some  nice  pepper-pot.  Going  into  that  portion  of  the  logie  which  was  screened  off 
for  the  women-folk,  he  told  his  wife  to  shriek  and  scream  as  if  he  were  killing  her. 
She  did  what  she  was  bid.  Konehu  brought  out  some  pepper-pot,  which  he  placed 
before  the  stranger.  The  man  tasted  and  was  enchanted  with  it.  "That  is  a  fine 
pepper-pot.  What  did  you  make  it  from?  "  he  says.  "Just  out  of  my  wife's  breast," 
replied  Konehu.  "Didn't  you  hear  her  yell  when  I  cut  it  off?"  The  foolish  man 
went  back  to  his  own  home,  and  seizing  his  wife,  gashed  her  breast  to  pieces,  but  the 
result  was  that  she  bled  to  death,  and  he  recognized  only  too  late  that  he  had  again 
been  tricked. 

361.  The  way  in  which  Konehu  managed  to  get  the  advantage  of  everybody  soon 
spread  abroad.  Among  others,  it  reached  the  ear  of  a  head-man  at  one  of  the  settle- 
ments. This  man  had  a  big  field  and  several  wives:  he  was  indeed  a  rich  man.  He 
prided  himself  on  being  very  clever  and  knowing  everything:  he  knew  all  about  the 
history  of  his  tribe,  and  by  looking  at  a  certain  star  he  could  tell  the  proper  time 
to  visit  the  coast  when  the  crabs  were  "on  the  march."  In  fact,  he  knew  he  was 
shrewder  than  Konehu,  and  publicly  said  so.    Now,  Konehu  heard  of  this,  and 

1  Although  Father  GumiUa,  upward  of  two  centuries  ago,  speaks  of  indigenous  rice  growing  luxuriantly 
on  the  Orinoco,  thus  far  I  have  not  met  with  any  records  of  its  having  been  cultivated  by  the  India.^ 
previous  to  the  Conquest.— W.  E.  R.  r  j    "» j^^u,ia 

» The  Arawaks  on  the  Essequibo  have  the  same  story. 


BOTH]  INTRUSIVE   BELIEFS   AND   TALES  377 

taking  up  a  position  on  the  path  leading  to  this  individual's  cassava  field,  waited  for 
the  owner  to  come  along.  As  soon  as  he  heard  footsteps  approaching,  he  loosed  his 
bowels,  and  tearing  a  "cap"  from  off  the  shoot  of  a  "troolie"  palm,  carefully  placed 
it  point  upwards  on  the  ground,  over  the  dung,  at  the  same  time  pressing  his  palms 
aroimd  the  edge  just  as  if  there  was  some  live  animal  imdemeath.^  When  a  few 
feet  distant,  the  owner  saw  Konehu  in  this  extraordinary  attitude,  he  asked  him  what 
he  was  doing.  "I  have  just  caught  a  bird  here,"  says  Konehu,  "and  am  afraid  of  it 
getting  away.  Do  you  happen  to  have  a  quake  with  you?"  Not  suspecting  any 
trickery,  the  msai  told  him  that  if  he  liked  to  go  roimd  to  his  hoiise,  he  could  have  the 
quake  which  he  would  find  hanging  up  on  one  of  the  posts.  So  he  puts  down  his  bow, 
arrows,  and  pegall,  and  Konehu  shows  him  how  to  hold  the  troolie  cap  tightly  down 
and  prevent  the  wonderful  bird  escaping.  Konehu  takes  up  the  bow  and  smxjws, 
marches  ofiE  to  the  logie,  and  makes  himself  quite  at  home  with  both  the  eatables  and 
the  women:  indeed,  he  spends  a  gloriously  happy  time  there.  But  as  for  the  man 
watching  over  the  wonderful  bird,  hour  after  hour  passed  and  he  finally  felt  so  weary 
that  he  tipped  up  one  edge  of  the  troolie  cap,  and  saw  that  he  had  indeed  been  out- 
witted by  the  very  man  he  had  boasted  to  despise. 

362.  The  time  at  last  arrived  when  mere  mention  of  Konehu's  name  made  everyone 
spit.  All  had  been  fooled  by  him  at  some  time  or  another,  and  now  left  him  strictly 
to  himself.  His  wife  went  off  with  another  man.  Poor  Konehu  did  not  know  how 
to  clean  the  house,  which  became  more  and  more  dilapidated ;  he  knew  nothing  about 
cooking,  he  had  no  cassava,  and  when  he  did  manage  to  go  out  hunting  with  bow  and 
arrow,  he  invariably  met  with  poor  success.  One  day,  however,  he  managed  to  shoot 
a  fine  big  deer.  He  ate  all  of  it  except  one  leg,  which  he  barbecued  and  slimg  up  to 
one  of  the  beams  of  his  house.  Next  day,  he  again  managed  to  secure  some  game, 
and  so  things  went  on,  his  luck,  day  after  day,  not  only  continuing  but  increasing. 
More  than  this,  every  time  he  reached  home  in  the  afternoon,  there  he  found  the  fire 
lighted,  the  pepper-pot  already  boiled,  everjrthing  tidied  up  and  cleaned,  and  yet 
not  a  soul  was  to  be  seen.  He  became  curious.  So  instead  of  going  hunting  out  back 
one  morning,  he  hid  himself  behind  a  big  tree  whence  he  could  observe  everything 
taking  place  in  the  house  without  himself  being  seen.  He  waited  and  waited.  By 
and  by  he  saw  the  deer  leg  (Sect.  98)  change  into  a  beautiful  woman,  and  he  then 
knew  who  it  was  that  had  been  minding  him  so  carefully.  He  rushed  forward 
and  held  her  fast.  He  wanted  her  to  be  his  wife,  but  she  resolutely  declined,  though 
she  promised  to  remain  and  continue  as  his  benefactress.  He  therefore  built  another 
house,  adjoining  his,  just  for  her  especial  use.  After  a  time,  she  changed  her  mind 
about  becoming  his  wife.  She  had  only  refused  his  ofier  before,  because  she  was 
afraid  he  might  tell  his  friends  and  relatives  who  she  was — the  offspring  of  a  deer's 
foot — the  shame  and  disgrace  of  which  she  felt  she  could  never  face.  The  bargain 
was  accordingly  struck  that  so  long  as  he  held  his  tongue  about  her  antecedents,  she 
would  remain  with  l""""  as  his  spouse:  if  he  betrayed  her,  she  would  punish  him. 
They  were  happy  together  for  a  long  time,  and  everything  prospered.  Konehu's  luck 
in  hunting  and  fishing,  as  well  as  his  abundance  of  provisions,  became  now  almost 
proverbial,  but  whenever  questioned  as  to  how  he  managed  to  secure  such  luck,  and 
what  binas  (Sect.  SSS)  he  employed,  he  always  remained  silent.  The  neighbors'  envy 
and  curiosity  were  not  to  be  baffled  by  his  silence.  They  said,  "Let  us  ask  Konehu 
to  a  paiwarri,  and  make  him  drunk.  Then  he  will  tell  us!"  So  they  held  a  big 
feast,  and  they  had  many  jars  of  drink,  and  Konehu,  getting  beastly  intoxicated,  told 
the  whole  story.  When  he  woke  next  morning  out  of  his  debauchery,  he  turned  hie 
steps  homeward.  His  astonishment  was  indeed  great  to  find  his  old  house,  without 
any  additions,  just  as  dirty  and  untidy  as  in  his  grass-widower  days— and,  yes,  there 
was  the  deer-leg  still  hanging  on  the  cord.    In  his  anger  he  determined  on  eating 

I  The  spathe  of  this  palm  ( Manicaria  sp.)  was  used  as  a  hat  by  the  Warrau  and  Aravrak  males. 


378  ANIMISM  AND  FOLK-LOBB   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS   [eth.  ann.  30 

the  venison,  but  when  he  stTUck  his  knife  in,  all  the  blood  gushed  forth.  This  sobered 
him,  and  he  left  the  house  to  become  a  Tvanderer.  He  may  be  here  today,  and  gone 
tomorrow.  Yes,  indeed,  there  are  so  many  Konehus  [i.  e.  rogues  and  vagabonds] 
wandering  about  the  world  now,  that  it  is  very  difficult  to  recognize  which  one  is 
our  old  friend. 

363.  The  Woman  and  the  Seepent  Oeoli 

Long  ago  there  was  a  girl  who  had  many  offers  of  marriage  from  among  her  own 
people,  but  who  always  refused  them.  One  day  a  stranger  came,  dressed  in  fine  style. 
Directly  she  saw  >iim  she  exclaimed,  "That  is  the  man  for  me.  I  want  him  for  my 
husband . "  He  married  her,  built  a  house  in  one  day,  and  prepared  all  the  f  urnitiu'e — 
as  the  stools,  paiwarri  trough,  the  mortar — all  at  the  same  time.  By  this  token 
(everything  being  made  so  quickly)  the  girl  knew  that  something  was  wrong,  but  she 
could  not  say  definitely  what.  As  a  matter  of  fact  it  was  really  the  terrible  snake  Oroli 
(Sect.  g3o),  who  had  come  disguised  as  a  man,  decorated  with  boar's  teetli  and  beau- 
tiful feathers.  And  when  at  the  wedding  feast  the  bridegroom  did  not  want  to  eat 
with  the  others,  and  could  be  prevailed  on  to  do  so  only  on  the  condition  that  he  should 
be  provided  with  an  uncooked  duck,  which  he  swallowed  all  by  himself,  the  girl  was 
still  more  certain  that  his  actions  were  a  token  of  some  impending  evil.  After  the 
feast  was  over  she  accompanied  her  husband  to  their  new  home,  where  she  remained 
in  his  hammock  for  three  days,  but  he  did  not  even  once  play  the  part  of  a  husband. 
He  was  really  starving  himself  preparatory  to  making  a  meal  of  her.  At  tlie  end  of  this 
time  he  told  her  to  turn  round,  so  that  her  head  rested  at  his  feet.  When  she  had 
obeyed  him,  he  started  swallowing  her  foot  first.  "Mother!  Mother!"  she  cried, 
"something  is  swallowing  me. "  "  No!  No! "  screamed  the  man,  "  I  am  only  acting 
as  a  good  husband."  Her  mother  rushed  into  the  house,  but  found  only  a  great  fat 
serpent  in  the  hammock.  Her  daughter  was  nowhere  to  be  seen,  and  the  mother 
knew  what  had  happened.  She  then  ran  to  the  priest  who  had  married  them,  and 
begged  him  to  kill  the  snake,  but  the  good  Father  said,  "No.  I  cannot  do  so, 
because  he  is  a  Catholic. ' '  So  the  girl  was  punished  for  having  preferred  the  stranger 
to  an  Indian. 

364.  The  Piai  and  the  Earthquake  People  (C) 

A  party  of  Caribs  were  out  shooting  birds  in  the  forest  when  an  earthquake  {tutulv) 
took  place :  this  made  a  great  noise  and  the  ground  opened.  Many  people  were  inside 
the  earth,  and  one  of  the  Caribs,  Aiyobanni  by  name,.jumped  in  to  join  tliem.  Hia 
mother,  not  being  able  to  find  him  anywhere,  commenced  weeping.  The  head-man 
of  the  Earthquake  People  heard  her  crying,  and  told  Aiyobaimi  how  she  was  mourning 
his  absence.  "You  must  stay  a  little  longer  with  us, "  he  added,  "but  by  and  by  we 
will  carry  you  back  to  her,  after  we  have  taught  you  all  about  piai.  "  They  taught 
him  the  practice  of  the  profession,  and  all  the  time  Aiyobanni  was  down  beneath 
the  ground  witli  the  Earthquake  People,  the  girls  made  him  amatory  overtures,  but 
he  wanted  none;  he  was  so  anxious  to  get  back  to  liis  poor  old  mother.  Many  years 
passed.  There  was  another  eai-thquake,  the  earth  opened,  and  Aiyobanni  approached 
his  mother.  "Don't  cry,  mother, "  were  liis  first  words  to  her.  He  slept  that  night 
under  her  roof,  but  complained  next  morning  of  tlie  great  number  of  dog  fleas  about. 
On  proposing  to  wet  the  ground,  his  mother  said,  "All  right,"  and  every  minute 
expected  to  see  him  go  to  the  boat-landing  to  fetch  the  water.  Instead  of  this  he 
knocked  at  all  the  house-posts,  and  water  flowed  from  the  baae  of  each  until  it  covered 
all  the  ground  and  rose  above  theii-  ankles.  His  mother  was  indeed  frightened  now 
and  thought  he  was  going  to  sink  the  earth  altogether.  After  doing  this  and  several 
other  wonderful  things,  his  fame  as  a  piai  spread  far  and  wide.    At  last  the  Missionary 


BOTH]  INTRUSIVE   BELIEFS  AND   TALES  379 

came  to  visit  him.  "Aiyobamii,"  said  the  visitor,  "you  are  a  piai  and  must  stop 
doing  these  things.  The  Government  pays  me  to  be  piai,  so  you  must  not  interfere 
with  my  ■work."  "ButI  can  not  stop,"  replied  Aiyobanni;  "had  Indians  taught  me, 
I  might  perhaps  be  able  to  oblige  you,  but  as  the  Earthquake  People  trained  me,  I 
dare  not  now  give  up  my  work."  About  a  month  later  the  Missionary  was  taken  ill. 
He  tried  many  medicines  without  success ;  hence  he  was  obliged  to  send  for  Aiyobanni. 
Although  the  Missionary  sent  for  him  with  a  letter  and  a  big  tent-boat,  for  some  time 
he  would  not  go;  finally,  after  being  sent  for  five  times  he  went.  When  he  reached 
the  Missionary's  house  after  making  his  patient  take  oS  all  his  clothes,  he  anointed 
him  from  head  to  foot,  whereupon  a  large  number  of  quartz  crystals  came  out  from  aU 
over  his  body  and  fell  to  the  floor.  The  Missionary  was  so  much  pleased  because  of 
the  cure  effected  that  he  paid  Aiyobanni  one  hundred  dollars;  but  the  latter  took 
good  care  neyer  to  tell  him  that  he  himself  had  caused  the  crystals  to  enter  his  body 
long  before  he  had  been  sent  for  to  give  treatment. 


Chapter  XXI 
MISCELLAISTEOUS  FOLK-LORE,  INDEPENDENT  OF  ANIMISM 

Various  Tales  and  Legends  {365S70). 

365.  How  THE  Lazy  Man  was  Cubed  (W) 

This  is  another  crab  story  (Sect.  275),  but  the  hero  of  it  was  distinguished  by  his 
laziness,  and  not  by  his  ignorance.  A  large  party  of  people  went  out  in  a  big  boat  to 
catch  crabs:  every  one  of  them  had  twenty  quakes  aboard,  and  as  they  rested  at  each 
stopping-place,  they  still  continued  plaiting  them.  You  see,  they  had  nothing  to  dis- 
tract their  attention,  having  left  their  wives  at  home  to  make  the  paiwarri  ready  for 
their  return.  At  one  of  the  inlets  where  they  put  in  for  a  rest  on  the  way  down,  they 
saw  growing  close  to  the  banks  a  small  kokerite  palm,  with  a  large  bunch  of  ripe  fruit. 
Having  cut  off  the  bunch,  they  put  it  into  the  boat,  shoved  off,  and  then  started  eating. 
The  hero  of  this  story  asked  them  to  save  all  the  seeds,  after  they  had  removed  the  fruity 
parts,  and  let  him  have  them.  This  they  did,  and  on  the  night  before  their  arrival 
at  the  place  agreed  upon  for  catching  crabs,  he  filled  all  his  quakes  with  them.  Next 
morning  the  others  landed  to  hunt,  but  this  fellow  refused  to  join  them,"  and  remained 
in  the  boat,  not  even  putting  his  feet  into  the  water.  He  knew  well  enough  how  to 
hunt  the  crabs,  but  was  too  lazy,  and  counted  on  receiving  contributions  from  all 
his  companions.  These,  on  the  contrary,  were  equally  determined  that  he  should 
not  have  any:  they  filled  all  their  own  quakes,  returned  to  the  boat,  and  finally 
reached  home.  It  was  night  when  they  got  there,  and  they  turned  into  their  ham- 
mocks. Next  morning,  they  called  their  wives  to  fetch  the  crabs  from  the  place  where 
they  had  left  them  at  the  water-side.  The  wife  of  the  individual  who  had  brought 
back  the  kokerite  seeds,  asked  him  where  his  crabs  were:  he  told  her  that 
she  would  find  them  at  the  bottom  of  the  heap  and  that  she  would  have  to  wait 
until  all  the  other  women  had  cleared  away  theirs.  She  did  as  she  was  instructed, 
and,  carrying  the  quakes  to  her  mother,  let  her  know  that  these  were  the  kind  of 
crabs  that  her  husband  had  brought  home  with  him.  The  old  woman  thought  much, 
but  merely  said,  "Put  them  into  a  big  pot  and  boil  them  on  the  fire,  till  the  shells 
crack."  In  the  meantime,  each  of  the  other  women  gave  the  naturally  disappointed 
wife  one  quakeful  of  crabs  each ,  but  conditionally,  on  her  promising  that  she  would  give 
none  to  her  husband.  And  thus,  with  one  exception,  they  all  started  on  a  hearty 
meal  of  crabs  and  paiwarri.  The  old  mother  took  a  calabash  full  of  the  cooked  kokerite 
seeds,  and  placing  it  before  her  good-for-nothing  son-in-law,  bade  him  eat.  This  he 
was  obliged  to  do,  even  if  only  out  of  mere  shame,  because  he  was  so  hungry,  and  he 
knew  that  no  one  would  give  him  of  their  crabs.  At  any  rate,  the  lesson  cured  him 
of  hia  laziness,  and  on  the  next  occasion  that  he  went  out  hunting,  he  brought  home 
to  his  poor  wife  crabs  and  not  kokerite  seeds. 

366.  Always  be  Content  (W) 

An  expedition  was  arranged  by  a  house-master  for  his  relatives  and  friends,  who 
were  to  come  and  join  him  on  the  coast  and  hunt  sea-birds.     Before  starting,  they  all 
made  quakes  for  collecting  the  birds'  eggs,  it  being  then  the  proper  season,  and  eggs 
380 


^°'^^'i  MISCELLANEOUS  FOLK-LOEE  381 

always  good  to  eat.>  After  they  had  gathered  sufficient  eggs  to  fill  their  baskets,  they 
proceeded  with  their  bows  and  arrows  to  shoot  birds,  and  were  very  successful.  The 
old  house-master's  son-in-law,  however,  went  oft  by  himself  in  quite  another  direction, 
where  there  was  plenty  of  dry  timber  and  shot  only  woodpeckers,  of  which  he  brought 
back  plenty.  When  they  got  home  again,  the  wives  made  cassiri  for  them.  The  old 
man  and  his  friends  gave  to  the  son-in-law  of  their  big  stock  of  various  sea-birds, 
and  the  latter  gave  them  woodpeckers  in  exchange.  In  the  course  of  conversation, 
they  asked  why  he  had  shot  only  land-birds  when  he  was  supposed  to  have  come  out 
to  shoot  sea-birds.  He  replied  that  he  did  not  mind  whether  they  had  come  from 
land  or  sea,  so  long  a^  they  were  birds,  and  that  he  was  quite  content  to  eat  one  or  the 
other. 

367.  The  Old  Woman  Who  Died  of  Shame  (W) 

A  very  old  woman  once  took  her  little  grandson  with  her  into  the  bush  to  gather 
honey.  She  looked  up  at  a  tree,  and,  seeing  some  bees  coming  in  and  out  of  a  hole, 
told  the  boy  she  was  going  to  climb  it.  Now,  as  these  were  biting  [stinging]  bees, 
she  told  him  also  that  she  intended  blowing  into  the  hole  so  as  to  keep  the  insects 
quiet.  When,  however,  she  reached  a  convenient  height,  and  commenced  blowing, 
she  soon  recognized  that  she  was  dealing  with  wasps,  not  bees.'  She  got  terribly 
stung,  and  in  beating  a  hasty  retreat,  her  foot  slipped,  her  kuyu  [apron-belt]  caught 
on  a  small  projecting  branch,  and  she  fell  naked  to  the  ground.  Of  course,  she  did 
not  dare  go  home  in  that  state,  and  so  her  grandson  shot  an  arrow  into  the  apron, 
hanging  a  long  way  up  on  the  tree,  and  brought  it  down  for  her.  They  went  back 
home,  and  the  old  woman  told  the  child  on  no  account  to  tell  his  parents  what  had 
happened,  because  she  was  so  afraid  of  being  laughed  at.  Thus  it  was  that  she  always 
kept  the  little  boy  near  her,  lest  he  should  talk  about  the  incident.  One  day,  how- 
ever, the  youngster  slipped  away  to  his  father  and  mother,  and  told  them  of  the  old 
grandmother's  adventure  with  the  wasps,  and  how  she  had  come  down  the  tree 
without  her  clothes.  They  roared  with  laughter  as  the  little  boy  mimicked  the  old 
woman's  actions.  The  poor  old  soul  heard  them  both  laughing,  and  began  to  cry 
for  very  shame;  and  she  cried  so  long  that  she  died. 

368.  The  Man  who  Interfered  with  his  Brother's  Wife  (A) 

There  were  once  two  brothers.  The  elder  went  one  morning  to  the  field  to  clean 
up,  leaving  his  wife  at  home  to  grate  cassava.  The  younger,  who  lived  at  a  distance, 
had  a  habit  of  visiting  his  brother's  house  always  at  a  time  when  he  knew  full  well 
that  he  would  not  be  at  home.  So  it  happened  on  this  very  occasion.  He  asked 
his  sister-in-law  where  her  husband  was,  and  she  told  him  quite  truly  that  he  had 
just  gone  to  the  field.  "And  when  is  he  coming  back?"  to  which  she  replied,  "In 
the  evening."  He  thereupon  asked  her  whether  she  would  like  him  to  take  liberties 
with  her,  an  offer  which  she  indignantly  refused.  So  he  tried  to  obtain  his  desires 
by  force:  she  repelled  him:  they  wrestled  with  one  another:  she  ran  away  into  the 
bush,  he  following  her  closely.     .     .     .     She  only  got  back  home  again  late  in  the 


1 1  am  well  aware  of  the  statement  often  made  (for  example,  by  Boddam-Whetham,  p.  250;  im  Thum, 
p.  265)  about  Indians  not  eating  birds'  eggs:  this,  however,  applies  only  to  eggs  of  domesticated  birds,  as 
noted  by  Sohomburgkin  his  visit  to  the  Takutu  (Sc.T.  70):  "Fowls  are  the  only  animals  which  the  Indian 
of  Guiana  domesticates  .  .  .  ;  but  he  raises  them  only  for  his  diversion,  as  he  makes  neither  use  of  their 
eggs  nor  of  their  flesh."  Crfivaux  (164),  in  French  Guiana,  speaking  of  fowls  and  eggs,  says  that  these 
are  not  eaten  by  the  Oyambis,  nor  by  the  Eoucouyennes.  On  his  asking  the  chief  for  the  reason,  the  latter 
told  him  that,  in  spite  of  his  advanced  age,  he  still  wished  to  have  children  and  that  the  eggs  of  all  species 
of  birds  were  preserved  for  the  old  people  of  both  sexes.  I  am  given  to  understand  that  the  aboriginal 
Guiana  receipt  for  cooking  eggs  is  as  follows:  Break  a  number  into  a  pot  over  the  flre,  stir  with  a  wooden 
spoon,  add  salt,  when  procurable,  to  taste,  and  then  serve.— W.  E.  R. 


382  ANIMISM  AND  FOLK-LOBB   OP   GUIANA  INDIANS  '[eth.  ann.  30 

afternoon  just  before  her  husband  arrived.  'RTien  he  saw  the  grated  cassava  lying  in 
the  trough  he  asked  her  what  she  had  been  about;  surely  she  had  not  taken  all  day 
to  grate  that  little  bit  of  cassava!  She  was  forced  then  to  tell  him,  how  hia  brother 
had  come  to  visit  her  during  his  absence,  how  he  had  chased  her  into  the  bush,  and 
what  had  happened  there.  The  husband  said,  "All  right!  I  will  wait  for  him  tomor- 
row, when  he  will  be  sure  to  visit  you  again."  The  next  day,  sure  enough,  the  brother 
came  once  more.  "Where  is  your  husband?"  he  inquired.  "  Yonder  in  the  mai-aia- 
bakuru,"  she  told  him.'  The  husband  purposely  made  a  noise  with  his  massi  [club] 
to  attract  the  attention  of  the  visitor;  the  latter  heard  it,  and  thinking  that  drink 
must  be  the  cause  of  the  row,  went  over  to  see  if  that  really  were  the  caae.  But  as  soon 
as  he  got  inside,  the  aggrieved  man  gave  him  a  good  beating,  told  him  what  he  had 
heard  from  hia  wife's  own  lips,  chased  him  into  the  bush,  still  beating  him,  and  ran  on 
until  he  could  run  no  farther.  When  the  husband  finally  got  home  again,  he  told  his 
wife  to  sling  up  their  hammock  close  to  the  roof,  on  the  runner  (to  which  the  thatch 
was  tigd),  because  his  brother  would  certainly  return  that  night  to  kUl  the  pair  of 
them.  There,  close  to  the  roof,  they  went  to  sleep,  and  in  the  middle  of  the  night  the 
brother  came.  They  heard  him  say,  ' '  I  will  show  you  what  I  will  do  for  your  trying 
to  kill  me."  They  saw  him  take  a  stick  and  strike  in  all  directions.  They  saw  the 
cudgel  knock  against  the  beam  and  break,  part  rebounding  on  the  would-be  mur- 
derer's head.  Half  dazed  with  the  blow,  the  latter  thought  it  was  the  injured  husband 
who  had  struck  him,  because  they  heard  him  scream  out,  "Oh!  instead  of  me  kUling 
you  as  I  had  intended,  you  have  killed  me."  The  husband  now  descended  from  his 
hammock  and  chased  the  worthless  fellow  out  into  the  bush,  saying,  "I  will  indeed 
kill  you  if  you  dare  come  here  again."  But  the  scoimdrel  never  returned  to  molest 
his  sister-in-law. 

369.  The  Old  Blind  Man  Who  Wanted  a  Woman  (W) 

There  was  once  an  old  blind  man  and  the  young  fellows  were  always  making  fun  of 
him.  One  day  theyasked  himif  he  would  like  to  have  a  woman.  He  said  "yes, "  and 
told  them  to  find  him  a  fine  young  one.  It  was  therefore  arranged  for  that  very 
evening,  that  they  would  tie  a  rope  to  his  hammock  and  attach  its  other  end  to  the 
hammock  of  a  young  girl,  so  that,  as  soon  as  everyone  was  asleep,  he  would  have  merely 
to  feel  his  way  stealthfully  along  the  rope.  Now,  instead  of  attaching  the  rope's  end 
as  originally  promised,  the  young  rascals  tied  it  to  a  tree  overhanging  the  river  bank, 
with  the  result  that  on  obeying  the  instructions  given,  the  poor  old  blind  man  floun- 
dered into  the  chilly  waters  of  the  stream,  and  just  managed  to  save  himself  from 
drowning  by  holding  onto  a  ho-aranni  tree.^  When  the  young  men  saw  that  their 
joke  had  gone  too  far,  they  became  frightened,  and,  getting  into  a  corial,  went  to  bring 
him  back.  "Grandfather!  we  have  come  to  fetch  you;"  but  the  old  man  was  much 
vexed  and  they  were  obliged  to  return  without  him.  One  of  the  youngsters,  dressing 
himself  up  as  a  girl,  with  an  apron-belt,  and  putting  the  basket-strap  over  liis  forehead, 
just  as  the  women  carry  it,  now  went  to  get  the  old  man  home.  "  No! "  he  said,  "  I  am 
not  coming  home  any  more; "  but  when  he  heard  the  young  man  say,  "  I  am  a  girl, " 
he  felt  her  cotton  anklets,  her  bangles,  and  her  basket,  and  was  accordingly  satisfied; 
he  then  jumped  into  the  corial  and  saved  himself. 


1  The  maraka-baluru  is  a  small  detached  house,  in  which  in  the  olden  times  the  Warrnu  house-master 
would  keep  his  arrows,  clubs,  tools,  and  implements,  and  other  knickknaoks. 

2  Any  snag  or  tree  growing  from  oUt  of  the  river-bad  above  the  water  is  believed  to  have  been  planted 
there  by  the  Water  People,  or  Ho-aranni  (Sect.  177),  and  hence  is  given  this  name. 


BOTH]  MISCELLANEOUS  FOLK-LOBE  383 

370.  How  We  Beat  the  Caeibs  (A) 

I  give  the  following  almost  word  for  word  translation  of  the  account 
told  me  by  an  old  Pomeroon  Arawak;  it  is  well  worth  comparing 
with  Brett's  version  (BrB,  35) : 

An  Arawak  and  a  Carib  were  very  friendly:  this  must  needs  be  bo,  because  each  had 
taken  the  other's  sister  to  wife.  They  regularly  used  to  go  hunting  together.  After 
living  in  harmony  for  a  long  time,  they  went  out  hunting,  but  on  tbia  occasion  they 
did  not  go  in  company,  and  they  both  stayed  away  longer  than  usual,  and  their  friends 
were  beginning  to  wonder  what  had  happened  to  them.  The  Arawak,  having  finally 
returned,  went  to  see  after  his  brother-in-law,  followed  his  tracks  into  the  bush,  and 
came  on  the  babracote  upon  which  he  found  the  dried  body  of  his  sister  whom  her 
husband  had  evidently  killed.  He  went  home,  but  did  not  speak  for  some  time.  He 
then  told  his  wife,  the  Carib's  sister,  to  come  into  the  bush  and  hunt  with  him:  when 
he  got  her  away,  he  killed  and  babracoted  her.  The  Carib  next  came  along  to  see 
what  had  happened,  and  he  soon  saw.  He  also  went  home  again,  but  did  not  speak  for 
some  time.  Finally,  he  expressed  a  wish  to  fight  and  kill  the  Arawak,  but  the  Nafudi 
said  "  No.  All  the  Caribs  together  must  fight  the  Arawaks  together. "  So  both  sides 
Cut  a  big  field  and  planted  plenty  of  the  particular  canes  required  for  making  arrows, 
and  when  these  canes  were  full  grown,  they  cut  them  down  and  completed  their 
weapons,  and  both  sides  erected  a  strong  house,  Waiba,  to  store  them  in.  Up  at  Jack 
Low,  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Pomeroon,  is  still  to  be  recognized  the  site  of  the  old 
settlement  and  fortress,  the  place  itself  even  to  this  day  being  known  as  Waiba-diki. 
Furthermore,  it  was  arranged  by  both  parties  that  as  they  intended  fighting  their 
battle  at  sea,  and  not  on  land,  they  would  allow  themselves  time  to  build  a  large 
number  of  canoes.  This  being  done,  they  filled  their  boats  with  arrows:  twenty 
canoes  were  paddled  by  Arawaks,  and  forty  by  Caribs.  They  all  went  down  the  river, 
out  to  sea,  at  the  Pomeroon  mouth,  each  taking  up  such  position  as  would  permit  of 
the  intervening  distance  being  just  sufficient  to  allow  of  the  arrows  thrown  from  one 
side  reaching  the  other.  The  Arawaks,  however,  were  shrewd.  They  made  themselves 
cork-wood  shields  [nonabohiianna].^  The  Caribs  let  fly  their  arrows  first,  but  these 
stuck  in  the  shields,  when  the  Arawaks  broke  them  off  with  their  mossi,  the  now 
almost  obsolete  club.  None  of  the  Arawaks  were  slain,  and  it  was  now  their 
turn  to  shoot.  This  they  did,  with  the  result  that  they  killed  all  their  enemy,  except 
two,  whom  they  purposely  spared  in  order  that  they  might  go  home  and  tell  their 
friends  what  had  happened,  and  what  to  expect  should  they  ever  dare  to  fight  the 
Arawaks  again.  The  two  who  had  been  spared  went  away  to  the  Cuyuni,  to  the 
Barima,  and  to  the  Waini,  and  remained  three  months  gathering  together  all  their 
people,  who  clamored  that  they  would  never  rest  until  they  bad  destroyed  all  the 
Arawaks.  The  Arawaks  were  waiting  for  them  at  Waiba-diki,  their  stronghold,  and 
stretched  a  vine-rope  across  the  river;  and  as  the  hosts  of  Caribs  approached  up  the 
stream,  the  steering  paddles  of  their  canoes  became  entangled  in  this  rope,  and  broke 
away;  and  while  the  occupants  were  looking  after  them,  their  canoes  all  tossed 
one  against  the  other  in  dire  confusion,  and  the  Arawaks  shot  showers  of  arrows  into 
the  wavering  multitude.  Half  the  Caribs  were  destroyed;  the  other  half  effected  a 
landing.  But  around  their  fortress,  the  Arawaks  had  already  built  a  palisade,  with 
just  a  few  chinks  in  it  to  permit  of  arrows  flying  through;' they  were  all  well  under 
cover,  and  though  losing  a  few  of  their  own  people,  massacred  as  before  all  their 
enemy,  leaving  but  two  to  give  the  news  to  their  friends.  These  two  went  to  the  east, 
to  Surinam,  and  started  collecting  the  remnants  of  their  own  tribe  from  those  parts. 


1  Although  we  have  historical  evidence  of  the  use  of  shields  Irom  the  Orinoco,  Cayenne,  and  the  Amazon, 
this  is  the  first  reference  that  I  have  come  across  concerning  these  weapons  in  British  Guiana.— W.  E.  R. 


384  ANIMISM   AND   FOLK-LOEE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS   [bth.  ann.  30 

About  three  months  passed.  The  Arawaka  could  wait  no  longer,  so  they  traveled 
over  to  Surinam,  and  came  upon  the  Carib  forces,  collected  in  a  fortress  with  enclosing 
palisade,  similar  to  what  they  themselves  had  constructed  for  their  own  preservation 
at  Waiba-diki.  The  Caribs  were  in  overwhelming  numbers.  So  the  Arawaka  hid 
themselves,  and  sent  in  one  of  their  number  to  reconnoiter.  This  man,  who  could 
talk  Carib,  painted  himself  like  one  of  that  nation,  and  boldly  entered  the  enemy's 
camp,  where  he  found  them  all  drinking.  He  said  he  was  a  Carib,  and  that  he  had 
just  come  from  the  Pomeroon  looking  for  his  family;  he  accepted  a  little  drink  and 
then  took  his  departure,  but  not  before  discovering  that  very  early  on  the  following 
morning,  long  before  daybreak,  a  crab  whistle  (i.  e.  made  from  a  crab  claw)  would  be 
blown  as  a  signal  for  them  to  prepare  for  battle.  The  scout  returned  to  his  people, 
with  all  the  information  that  he  had  gleaned.  That  night,  every  one  of  the  Arawaks 
made  a  crab  whistle,  and  surrounding  the  Caribs  while  they  were  still  drinking,  blew 
their  whistles,  surprising  the  enemy,  and  slew  them  all,  save  one  man  and  woman, 
who  begged  so  earnestly  for  their  lives  that  only  their  legs  were  speared.  It  is  from 
this  couple  that  all  the  present  day  Caribs  are  derived,  and  this  is  why  there  are  com- 
paratively so  few  of  them.     It  was  we  Arawaks  who  broke  their  power. 


GLOSSAEY 

AcoTjRi  or  Agouti,  Adoubi.     Species  of  Dasyprocta;  small  game  animala  of  great 

food  value. 
Baboon.    The  almost  invariable  Creole  term  applied  to  the  Howling  Monkey  ( Mycetes 

seniculus). 
Babracote  (a  corrupted  form  of  Barbecue).    A  small  three-legged  or  four-legged 

wooden  staging  upon  which  meat  is  laid  to  be  smoke-dried. 
Banab  or  Benab.     A  temporary  shed  built  of  sticks  and  leaves  for  shelter  from  sun, 

rain,  or  dew. 
Barbecue.    To  smoke-dry. 

Bbltiri.     a  fermented  drink,  made  from  cassava,  essentially  for  home  consumption. 
Buck  (feminine,  Buckeen).    A  term  originally  applied  by  the  Dutch  to  any  aborig- 
inal Indian. 
Bullet  Tree  .    The  Miwusops  globosa,  a  timber  tree  with  excellent  fruit  and  valuable 

"milk." 
BuNLA.    The  "stinking-bird"  {Ostinops  spp.). 
BusH-cow.     Another  name  for  the  tapir. 
Bush-hog.    Dicotyles  sp. 
Bush-master  snake.    Lachesis  mutus. 
Bush-rat.    The  name  applied  in  the  Pomeroon  District  to  the  opossum.    There  are, 

however,  several  bush-rats  proper  (Muridse). 
Oamudi,  Camoodie.    The  land  {Boa  constrictor)  or  water  (Eunectes  muriniis)  boas. 
Cassava  bread.    The  Indian's  "staff  of  Ufe,"  made  from  the  Manihot. 
Cassiri,  Caxiri.     a  fermented  drink,  similar  to  beer,  made  from  cassava;  drunk  in 

large  quantities  to  intoxicate. 
Chigoe.     A  species  of  flea  which,  penetrating  the  flesh,  may  cause  great  irritation. 
CoRLAL.     A  dug-out  canoe. 
Creole.    A  British  Guiana  term  applied  to  any  person  born  in  the  colony,  of  parents 

other  than  aboriginal  Indians. 
Curare  (known  also  as  Urali,  Wurali).    The  well-known  deadly  poison  of  which  the 

chief  ingredient  is  derived  from  Strychnos  toxifera. 
GiLBACKER.     A  food-fish  {Sciodekthys  parheri). 
Haiamara.     a  food-fish  {Eoplias  macrophthalmus). 

Haiawa,  Haiowa.     The  Incense  tree,  from  which  a  very  fragrant  resin  is  derived. 
Harri-habri.    See  Yahri-yabri. 
HoBU.    The  Hog-plum  (Spondias  lutea). 
Howling  monkey.    See  Baboon. 
HuRi.     Atood-fJBhiHopliasmalabaricus). 
Igaripe.    a  water-channel. 
Itabo.    a  water-channel. 
Ite  (written  also  Ita  and  Eta).    The  Mauritia  palm;  of  immense  economic  value  to 

the  Indians. 
Itiriti.     a  plant  {lachnosiphon)  with  a  reedlike  stem,  which  is  split  down  to  form 

strands  for  plaiting. 
Jigger.    See  Chigoe. 

Keskedee.    The  onomatopoeic  term  for  a  certain  bird  (a  species  of  Lanius). 
Kokerite.    The  MarimUiana  regia  palm. 
KuBAUA  (written  also  Cbowa).    A  species  of  Agave  from  the  fibers  of  which  very 

strong  cords  are  made. 
Kusm.     A  leaf-cutting  ant;  very  destructive  on  the  plantations. 
Labaria.     An  exceedingly  poisonous-snake  {Lachesis  lanceolatus). 
Labba.    One  of  the  most  savory  of  the  rodents  {Ccelogenys  paca). 

15961°— 30  KTH— 15 25  385 


386  ANIMISM   AND   FOLK-LOBE   OF   GUIANA  INDIANS   [eth.  i.nN.  30 

LuKUNANNi.    A  food  fish  (CicfeZo  ocellaris).    The  Pomeroon  Indians  sometimes  speak 
of  it  as  "sunflsh, "  owing  to  its  brilliant  coloiation. 

Maam.    See  Scrtjb-tuhkey. 

Maipubi.    The  Indian  name  for  the  tapir. 

Maloka,  Malocca.    a  laige  house  in  which  several  families  live  a  more  or  less  com- 
munal life. 

Manicole.    The  Euterpe  edulis 'pahn. 

Makabunta.    The  Creole  term  for  several  species  of  wasp. 

Maraka.    The  Calabash-gourd  rattle. 

Marudi.    A  black  fowl  (Penelope  sp.)  with  a  scarlet  neck. 

Matapi.    The  plaited  snakelike  press  for  squeezing  the  poisonous  juice  out  of  the 
cassava. 

Mora.    One  of  the  giants  of  the  forest  trees  the  wood  of  which  is  very  hard. 

MoROEOT.    A  food  fish,  something  like  the  pacu  (Myletes). 

"Nancy  "-STORY.    One  of  the  many  African  stories  having  the  mythical  spider,  or 
arumd,  as  hero;  hence  applied  by  the  Creoles  to  any  legend,  myth,  or  fairy  tale. 

Negrocop.     "Crane"  or  "stork"  {Mycteria  americaTui). 

Opossum.    See  Bush-rat;  Yawarri. 

Ouicou.    A  fermented  drink,  or  paste,  made  from  cassava  and  potatoes. 

Paiwarri.    a  blackish  fermented  drink  made  from  cassava  used  on  occasions  of 
feasting  and  sport. 

Paripi  or  Peach-palm.    Ouilielma  sp. 

Peccary.    The  kairuni  or  abuya,  two  of  the  bush-hogs. 

Pegall.    a  basket  having  a  plaited  body  and  cover,  much  like  a  European  woman's 
traveling  dress  basket. 

Pbppeb-pot.    a  meat  stew  containing  capsicums  and  cassareep,  kept  good  by  daUy 
sterilizing  (boiling). 

PiMPLEB  Palm.    From  "pimple, "  meaning  a  thorn;    species  of  £ac<m. 

PiRAi.    A  very  voracious  carnivorous  fish  (Pygocentris  sp.)  with  exceedingly  strong 
and  sharp  incisors. 

Powis.    An  excellent  bird  (Crax  sp.)  for  the  table. 

Purple-heart.    A  strong  timber  (Copaifera  sp.)  used  in  making  dug-out  canoes, 
house  posts,  etc. 

Quake.    A  term  applied  indiscriminately  to  all  open-work  Indian  baskets. 

QuATTA.    A  monkey  {Ateles  paniscus). 

QuERRiMAN.    A  food  fish  (Mugil  brasilianus). 

Salapenta.    The  Creole  term  for  the  larger  lizards. 

Sawyer  Beetle.    A  beetle  (Macrodontia  dejani)  which  "rings"  branches  of  trees. 

ScBUB-TURKEY  Or  Maam.     Tinamus  suhcristatxis. 

Sea-cow.    A  Creole  term  for  the  Manatus. 

SttK-coTTON  Tree.    A  large  deciduous  tree  (Eriodendron,  Bomhax). 

Tiger.    The  Creole  term  applied  to  practically  all  the  members  of  the  feline  tribes- 
jaguar,  puma,  wildcat,  and  others. 

Tbuli  or  Tkooue.    The  Maniearia  palm,  the  leaves  of  which  are  used  for  thatch. 

Thumpeter.    The  Wanacabba  bird  (Psophia  sp.). 

TJbali.    See  Curake. 

Vulture.    The  carrion-crow  "governor,"  or  "Boss"  (Sarcoramphus  papa). 

Water-dog.    The  Creole  teiin  for  otter. 

WooDSKm.    A  canoe  made  of  a  single  sheet  of  bark. 

WuBALi,  Urau.    Other  forms  of  the  word  Curare. 

Yackman.    The  Jagd-man's,  or  Huntsman's,  Ant,  which  comes  at  regular  intervals 
and  clears  out  all  the  other  ants. 

Yarri-yabri.    The  Indian  flute. 

Yawarri.    Species  of  opossum  (Didelphys). 


NOTE 

Pages  387-425  of  the  Thirtieth  Annual  Report,  of  which  this 
memoir  forms  a  part,  consist  of  a  list  of  publications  of  the  Bureau 
of  American  Ethnology. 


INDEX 

(In  connection  with  this  index  consult  pages  101-102, 109-111,  llJ-116,  385-386.) 


Page 

Abbreviations,  key  to 107, 113-116 

Aborb  Indians,  identification  of.      119 

Abortion — 

description 246 

medicine  used  in 52 

Accidents,  cause  of 241 

AcHAGiTA  Indians,  legend  on  crea- 
tion   143, 145, 146 

.^CKAWOi.    See  Akawai. 

Aco«UAlNDiAN8,beIiefastoGod..      117 

AcufjA,  C.  (AC)— 

cited 118, 139, 334, 365 

on  Amazons 364,  365 

on  carvings 140 

on  dwarfs,  etc 363 

Adaba,  legend  of 215-216 

Adaili,  legend  of 212 

Adda,  beliefs  concerning 171-172, 

229-230 

Agates,  avoidance  of 238 

Ahuba.    See  Fish-mamma. 

Akawai  Indians — 

amativeness,  expressions  of.  163-164 

binas 284, 285 

burial  customs 154-155, 156, 158 

hunting  customs 294 

legends  of,  on  creation 142, 

145, 199, 262 

natal  customs 319, 320 

ordeals 278,  281, 339 

revenge 354-355, 358,  360, 361 

Akawoio.    See  Akawai. 

Alabama,  collection  from 22 

Alaska-Yukon-Pacipic     Exposi- 
tion   14,16,20 

Alder  bark,  used  for  dyeing 80 

Alexander,  J.  E.  (A) — 

cited 239 

legend   of  Hariwali  and   the 
wonderful  tree 120 

Alibamu,  researches  among  the ...        18 


Pag» 

Alligators — 

beliefs  concerning 369 

legends  concerning 135,212 

rain  due  to 267 

teeth  as  talismans 289-290, 298 

Alligator  STOOLS,nature  of.  135,192,250 

Alubiri — 

legends  concerning 119,120,142 

SeeofeoABORi;  Haburi;  Hara- 
WALi;  Oruperi. 

Amalivaca,  legends  concerning. . .     119, 
136, 149-150 

Amaranthus — 

bread  colored  by 74, 87 

cheeks  colored  by 83 

used  as  food 67 

used  in  ceremonies 87 

Amativeness,  expression  of. ...  163-164 

Amazons — ■ 

explanation  of  myth 365-366 

legends  concerning 222, 

335, 363, 364-366 

Anabau  Indians,  burial  customs.      159 

A'neglakya,  legend  of 46 

A'negl.\ky.itsi'tsa,  legend  of 46 

Anger,  how  indicated 300-301 

Animal  gods,  influence 40 

Animals — 

as  human  beings 199-227 

attributes,  transfer  to  human 

beings 292,297 

binas  from 284-285,288 

control  of 340-341 

creation 148 

derivation  of  man  from 143-144 

dogs  named  for 307 

Kanaima  as 356 

medicines  derived  from 60 

men  changed  to 199 

legends 184,201 

omens  from 274-277 

427 


428 


INDEX 


Animals — Continued.  Page 

plants  associated  with 37,38,40 

pregnant,  taboo  for  food 297 

spirits  of 153, 174-175, 199 

propitiation  of 197 

transformation  to  man....       199 
Animism  and  roLK-LORB  op  Gui- 
ana Indians,  memoir  on 2ft-28, 

103-386 

Animism,  introduced,  tales 371-379 

Ant-eater — 

legends 220-221,225 

nature 369 

usedforfood 297 

Ant  fraternity — 

medicine  of 61 

wormwood  used  by 42 

Antiseptics,  use..., 41,42,46 

Ants — 

binasfrom 285 

bites  of,  treatment 44 

used  in  ordeals.. . .  280, 281, 308- 
310, 339-340 

disease  caused  by 40 

legends  concerning 211, 263,  344 

omen  from , 275, 277 

origin  of 129 

Apalai  Indians — 

ordeals 310,314,315 

sickness 346, 350 

Akai-Dai.    See  Dia-Dia. 
Arawak  Indians — 

anger,  indications 300-301 

beUefs. 118, 119, 120, 152, 

161, 168-169, 181, 187, 229, 236, 261 

binas 284, 285, 286, 288 

birthmarks 326 

burial  customs 155, 156, 158 

cassava 230 

courtship 313 

couvade 322, 324 

disease 347-348 

dogs 282-283, 285 

food 230, 295, 297, 352 

legends  . .  120-122, 141-142, 145-147, 
150-152, 173, 175-176, 184-185, 188- 
191, 193, 194, 203-205, 209-210, 212- 
213, 215, 219-223, 228-230, 245-246, 
257,  261,  269, 284, 316-318, 381-384 

marriage  customs 315-319 

medicine-men 329, 343-345 

menstruation 309 

names 305-307, 345 


Arawak  Indians — Continued.  Page 

natal  customs. .  319, 320-322, 323, 324 

omens 271, 274, 276-277 

ordeals 279 

poisoning 343 

puberty 309, 311, 312-313 

silk-cotton  tree 229-230 

talismans 299 

vengeance 356, 357-358 

war  with  Carib  Indians 383-384 

words  tabooed  by 252, 307 

See  also  various  Arawak  tribal 
names. 

Arawanili,  identification  of 120 

Ahekuna  Indians — 

comets 259 

ordeals 278, 281 

vengeance 357 

Argentina,  researches  in 11-15 

Arizona,  researches  in 11 

Armadillo — 

bina  for 282, 368 

charms  made  from 368' 

habits 368 

omensfrom 274 

Arrows — 

bow  and,  use  of 314-315, 361-362 

broken — 

castigation  with 210, 362 

charm  from 214, 273 

legends  of 213-214 

used  by  spirits 361-362 

lucky,  legend  of 214 

Mission  of 362 

protection  against  spirits  by .  293-294 

shot  upward 361 

spirit,  disease  due  to . . .  352, 356, 361 
toy,  wax  tips  of 276 

Arts,  restrictions  on . . . 292, 302-304 

A.RURESSO  BIRD,  legend  concerning      226 

Assassins  ,  employment  of 357 

Aster — 

used  in  folk-lore 84 

used  in  medicine 43 

AtabXca  Indians,   beliefs  as  to 
eclipses 257 

Atabapo  Indians,  belief  as  to  God       117 

Atorai  Indians,  beUef  as  to  petri- 
faction of  body 152 

Attacapa — 

linguistic  material  of 19 

research  among  the 18 

Auguries.    See  Omens. 


INDEX 


429 


Axes — 


Page 


material  of 127 

See  aUo  Stone  axes. 
Aztecs,  Bpirits  of 171 

Babies,  binas  for 187, 286, 288 

Baboons — 

flexing  of  hands 209 

legends  concerning 150-151, 

209-210,211,222,231,' 

232-233,  292-293,  363 
Babbacote — 

camudi  and,  legend 261 

description 335 

star  named  for 261-262 

Baby  spirit — 

explanation 324-325 

identity 169,325 

Bache,  Franklin,  cited 62 

Baldness,  absence  of 176 

Ballou,  H.  M.,  work  of 10, 17 

Bamboo,  spirits  aasociated  with.  228,233 

Bancroft,  E.  (Ba),  cited 238, 

268, 294, 323, 327, 329, 
331,  333,  338,  366, 370 
Barberrt — 

clan  name  from 86 

dye  from 88 

.  used  in  ceremonies 88 

Barraouan  Rook,  man   created 

from 145-146 

Barrenness,  shame  of 187, 286, 287 

Barrere,  p.  (PBa),  cited..  118, 156, 158, 
163, 170, 181, 255, 269, 291, 296, 
302, 303, 310, 312, 314, 320, 321, 
322,  324,  325,  328,  330,  340, 350 
Basket.  See  Crab  baskets;  Eye- 
socket  basket;  Medicine-man 
basket. 

Basketry,  plants  used  for 81 

Bates,  H.  W.  (HWB),  cited 118, 

157, 170, 174, 176, 180, 181, 242, 275, 
288, 298,  312, 328, 329,  330, 342, 352 
Bathing — 

omission  of 272 

time  for 131 

Bat  Mountain,  l^end 259 

Bats — 

legends  concerning 221, 259, 276 

omens  from 274 

Bead  bread.    See  Popped  corn. 
Bead  water — 

preparation 76 

used  in  ceremonies 76 


Beans—  Page 

colors  of,  importance 69 

howprepared 69-70 

used  in  folk-lore 85 

Bear,  invoked  in  medicine 60 

Beard-tonoue — 

rabbit  sticks  made  from 96 

used  in  ceremonies 95-96 

Beasts,  change  of  men  into 149, 

150-151, 182, 184 
Bechamel,  F.     See  Grillet  and 
Bechamel. 

Bee  plant  used  for  food 69 

Bees — 

controlled  by  medicine-man..      341 

effect  of  water  on 201 

legends  concerning 199-201 , 

204-205,305 

presage  from 276-277 

Beetle,  Sawyer,  talismans  from.       289 
Beetle,  Whistling,  omen  from  ..      272 
Bench.    See  Alligator    stools; 
Medicine-men,  bench. 

Bernau,  J.  H.  (Be),  cited 277,302, 

329, 343, 346,  356, 357, 358, 371 
Betoye  Indians — 

beliefs  as  to  God 117,118 

beliefs  as  to  spirits 181 

Beverley,  Robert,  cited 47 

Bibliograpety    op    Guiana,   key 

to 11^116 

BioELow, .cited 41 

Bigness,  greatness  connoted  by.  192-193 
Binas — 

legends  concerning 286-287 

nature 281-288 

specific  attractions  of...  281-282,284 

use 282, 286-287 

See  aho  Charms. 
Birds — 

beliefs  concerning 371 

omens  from 274-275 

plants  associated  with 38 

plumage  of,  origin 212, 225-226 

spirits  incarnated  in 174-175 

weather  foretold  by 269 

BiRTH-MABKS,  causo  of 326 

BnTER    CASSAVA    WATER,  suicide 

by 227 

Black  dye,  source  of 80 

Black  Tiger — 

l^:end8....  213-214,215-216,217-218 
thunder  due  to  roar  of 270 


430 


INDEX 


Page 

Blanco,  Ruiz,  cited 139 

Blind  man  who  wanted  a  girl, 

legend 382 

Blindness  caused  by  spirits 182, 185 

Blood — 

spirit  in .152 

talisman  from 290 

Blowing  (with  the  mouth),  ob- 
jects of ■ 164 

Blow-tubb    grass,    spirits    asso- 
ciated with 228,282 

Bluebell,  used  in  medicine 44 

Blue  grama,  brooms  and  brushes 

made  from 83 

Blue  leaf,  fruit  of,  used  as  con- 
diment         71 

Blub  spot  on  dead,  significance.     356, 

361 
Boa  constrictor,  beliefs  concern- 
ing   - 370 

See  also  Camudi. 

Boas,  Dr.  Franz,  work  of 10, 21 

Boats — 

decoration  of.... 255 

man  kidnaped  by. 222 

superstitions  concerning 303 

washing  spoons  from 241, 252,  267 

words  taboo  in 252-253, 307 

Boddam-Whetham,  J.  W.  (BW), 

cited.. . .  128, 164, 236, 239, 275, 300,  381 
Body — 

immortality 149-150, 151-152 

life  restored  to 170, 177-178 

petrifaction 152 

rejuvenation 149-150, 151 

spirits  associated  with. .  149, 152-164 

transfer  of 158 

transformation 149, 

150-151, 182, 184r-185, 199, 229 
See  also  Spirits. 
BoLiNGBROKE,  H.  (Bol),  on  origin 

of  man 141,233 

Bolivia — 

collections  from 22 

researches  in 11-15 

Bolton,  Dr.  H.  E.,  work  of.., 10,16 

Bones— 

gifts  of 158-159, 168 

used  in  invocation 168 

removal  of,  in  legends 121, 172 

spirit  in 152, 153, 158-159 


Page 
BoRDE,  Fr.  de  la  (BBR)— 

cited 141, 153, 156, 160, 

163,  165,  168,  257, 259, 260, 268, 
270,  290,  296,  303, 306, 314, 320, 
321,  323,  340,  342,  351,  352, 353 

on  invocation  of  spirits 168 

Botuto — 

cultof 137 

See  also  Trumpet. 
Bouto.    See  Dolphin. 
Bower-bird,  legend  concerning.  226-227 
Boye.    See  Magicians. 
Branch,  C.  W.,  archeological  col- 
lection of , 21 

Bravery,  reward  of 216-217 

Bread,  Zu5fi,  description 73-74 

Brer  Rabbit,  story  of 372-378 

Brett,  W.  H.  (Br)— 

cited 118, 119, 120, 125, 136, 141, 

142,  145,  148,  151, 154, 156, 212, 
218,  225,  229,  238,  242, 245, 254^ 
255,  260,  265,  268,  300, 318, 319, 
320,  327,  328,  331,  339, 352, 353, 
354,  356,  357,  358,  360-361,  383 

on  medicine-man's  ordeal 339 

on  scalping 176 

ontheflood.. 148 

Brinton,  D.  G.  (Bri)— 

cited 158, 328 

linguistic  material  of 18 

British  Columbia,  researches  in.         15 

Brooms,  blue  grama  used  for 83 

Brown,  0.  B.  (Bro)— 

cited 164, 175, 

176, 236,  237,  238-239,  242-243, 
254, 267,  268,  278,  297,  298-299, 
300,  341,  357,  358,  363-364,  368 

on  medicine-men 351-352 

on  protection  against  spirits .  293-294 

on  Warracaba  tiger 367 

Bruises,  medicine  for  reducing...        44 
Brushes — ■ 

blue  grama  used  for 83 

soapweed  used  for 82 

Buffalo  bur,  used  in  medicine  . .        60 
Bull  nettle — 

used  in  curdling  milk 70 

used  in  medicine 60 

BUNIA   BIRD— 

associated  with  air  plants 209, 

231-232, 371 


INDEX 


431 


Bttnia  bird — Continued.  page 

l^ends 131, 209, 221, 231-232 

man  taugtt  by 147, 209, 221, 371 

stench 371 

BxTRiAii  CUSTOMS,  details. . .  149, 155-160 

Burns,  treatment  of 42, 51 

Bush  child,  The  unrLE,  l^end. .      326 

Bush-cow.    See  Tapik. 

Bush  devils,  nature  of 171 

Bush  hogs — 

bina  for 282, 284-285 

glands 368 

l^end  concerning 187 

teeth,  of,  talismans  from 289 

used  as  food 297 

Bush-master  snake — 

antidote  against 232 

origin 122,368 

transformation  of,  to  pot 193 

BusHNELL,  D.  I.,  JR.,  manuscript 

by 24 

BusH-RAT,  legend  concerning 223 

Bush  SpiRrrs — 

amativeness. . .  170, 177, 181, 187,- 189 

anger  of,  at  mockery 170, 194 

animals  and.    See  Animals. 

association  with 170, 195-197 

belief  in 152, 154, 163 

binas  against 298 

cannibalism 170,177,181,187 

dead  restored  by 170, 178 

description 171-177 

disease  due  to.    See  Sickness. 
exorcism. .  149, 163-164, 170, 182, 197 

explanation 366 

helpfulness 170, 178-179 

hunting  ability 185-187 

invocation 347-351 

killing 188-189 

mimicking 194 

mischief  done  by. .  170, 179-185, 187 

names 170-171,193-194 

natural  history 170-198 

origin 1"0 

plants  associated  with 228-234 

protection  against 170, 

177, 180-181, 196-198, 298 

recognition 176-177, 185, 190 

smell 1" '' 

tobacco  liked  by 191-192 

tricking  of 191 


Bush  Spirits — Continued.  page 

See  also  Adda;  Dai-Dai;  Ek- 
kekttlijHebus;  Hyorokon; 
Immawari;    Iolokiamo; 

JURUPARl;         KONOKO- 

Kutuha;  Mabota;  Makai- 
ABANi;  Mawari;  Tuku- 
TUHA ;  Yawahus  ;  YuROKON ; 

ETC. 

Butterflies — 

.  flowers  associated  with 64 

l^endsof 130 

Byington,  Cyrus,  Choctaw  dic- 
tionary of 19 

Cactus,  CANE,  used  as  food 69 

Cactus  fraternity — 

medical  practice  of 52, 62-63 

squash  used  by 46 

Cactus  spines,  how  extracted 62 

Caladium — 

binas  made  from 281-282, 285 

spirits  associated  with. .  117, 228, 232 
talismans  from 288 

California,  researches  in 11,15 

California  Indians — 

Datura  used  by 47 

Euphorbia  usedhy 51 

Camudi — 

babracote  and,  legend 261 

beUfefs  concerning 370 

burning  of,  rain  caused  by . . . .      267 

Caribs  descended  from 143-144 

identification 241-242 

legends 239, 243, 250 

starnamed  for 261-262 

stench 370 

Cancer  root,  usetl  in  ceremonies..       61, 

98-99 

Candle-ply,  story  of 277 

Cane  cactus,  use  of 69, 95 

Cannibalism — 

among  Carib  Indians 273 

object  of 149-158 

spirits  guilty  of 177-181 

Canoes.    See  Boats. 

Canstatt, ,  cited 47 

Cantina,  acknowledgments  to 38 

Capuna  Indians,  carvings  by 140 

Cardinal  flower,  used  in  medi- 
cine         56 


432 


INDEX 


Page 
Cardinal  points — 

colors  symbolic  oi 46, 64 

plants  ascribed  to 37-38 

Caeib  Indians — 

abbreviation  for  name 107 

amativeness,  expressions  of.  163-164 

beliefs  afi  to  dreams 165 

beliefs  as  to  spirits.  163, 167, 177, 179 

binas 283-284, 285 

-boyis-escape  from 273-274 

burial  customs 156-160, 299 

cannibalism 273 

comets 259 

couvade 320-324 

eclipses 258-259 

fighting  women  of 365 

food 295-296, 352 

legends 129, 

130,    133-135,    146-147,    152, 

179-180, 181,  205,  211, 218-219, 

223,  248-249,  265,323,  378-379 

,   as  to  origin  of  man...;..  141,143 

marriage  customs 314 

menstruation 309 

modeling 140 

names 306, 307 

natal  customs..  319, 320-322, 323, 324 

omens 271 

ordeals 278, 309-310, 339 

origin tl43-146 

poisons 359 

protection  against  spirits 180- 

181,  298-299 

puberty 309,  312 

religious  beliefs 117, 136, 139 

sails  invented  by 125 

sickness 349,  351,  353 

stars 260 

storms  feared  by 269 

talismans 290-291 

■war  with,  Arawak  Indians...  383-384 

Words  taboo 253 

See  also  various   Carib    tribal 
names. 

Cahibiscb  Cliff,  legend  of 238 

Cabuona      Indians,      modeling 

.  among 140 

Carrion    crows    and  medicine- 
man, legend 343-345 

' '  Carte  Figubativb  "cited 20 

Carter,  Hon.  George  R.  ,  acknowl- 
edgment to 17 


Page 

Carving,  skillin 140 

Cassava — 

ceremonies  of 230 

spirits  associated  with 228,  230 

Caterpillars,  used  in  ordeals. .  279,  281 

Cathartics,  used  by  Zuni 51,  53 

Catlin,  G.  (GC),  cited -299-300 

Caul,  luck  from, ,- 271 

Caulin, ,--on  belief  in  God 

among  Orinoco  tribes 118 

Cauxana  Indians,  natal  customs.      325 

Cayenne — 

belief  as  to  God  in 117,118 

burial  customs  in 156, 157 

courtship  in 313-314 

dances  in 301-302 

eclipses  in 255 

foodin 296 

investigation  in 107 

natal  customs  in 321,  324,  325 

puberty  in 309,310,312 

words  taboo  in 252-253 

C A^npoB,  description 174 

Cayuga  ,  study  of  language  of 20 

Cedar — 

tinder  made  from 93 

used  in  ceremonies 93 

used  in  medicine 55 

used  in  preparing  fiber 78 

Celibacy,  thought  to  be  uncanny.  247 

Cemi — 

invocation 351 

nature 169 

worship 137,168-169 

Central  America — 

bulletin  on  languages  of 19 

linguistic  families  of 23 

Ceremonies,  plants  used  in 87-100 

Cbreso,  Father,  cited 137 

Chaima  Indians,  reUgious  beliefs 

of 118,139 

Champlain,  Samuel,  cited 20 

Charms — 

beUef  in. ..  180, 181, 197, 233-234, 270 
See  also  Binas;  Kickshaws; 
Talismans. 
Chbmin  (female).    See  Cemi;  Fa- 
miliar Spirits. 

Chewing-gum,  root  used  for 68 

Chigoes,  lameness  caused  by 217 


INDEX 


433 


Children —  Page 

begetting  of 325-326 

binaafor 285,286 

birth,  of ,  bunuT^  of  cord 323 

customs 319-326 

medicine 49,  51,  55,  62 

ordeals 319-322 

See  also  Pregnancy. 

birth-mark 326 

cryii^ 171 

deformed — 

cause 187,371 

sacrificed 325 

delivery.... 321-323,326 

desire  for 187 

food 295 

inducing  birth  of.  84,  85,  96,  325-326 

omens 275 

sickness  of ,  cause 171 

spirits  of 324-325 

Chile — 

coriander  used  with 66 

food  seasoned  with 69, 70 

Chile,  researches  in 11-15 

Chippewa,  study  of  music  of —  21, 23, 24 
Chitimacha — 

linguistic  material  of 19 

research  among  the 18, 22 

Choctaw — 

dictionary  of,  publication 19 

manuscript  on 24 

Christening,  mode  of 306 

Cigarette  leaves,  origin  of 336 

Cigarettes  used  in  medicine 52, 54 

CiMEX  PRATBRNITY,  mediciues  of..  39,46 
Clammy  weed,  used  in  ceremo- 
nies          96 

Clan  names,  derived  from  plants.  37,86 

Clarke  ,  Prof.  F.  W. ,  cited 41 

Clay — 

eating  of,  with  potatoes 71 

modelingin 139-140 

Clayton,  J.  B.,  work  by 24 

Cliff  Palace — 

repair  of 21 

views  of 20 

Clouds,  descent  of  man  from 141 

COCKLEBUR — 

used  for  food 71-72 

used  in  medicine 62 

15981  ° — 30  HTH. — 15 28 


Colds —  Page 

how  treated  by  Zufii 49, 55 

wormwood  used  for 42 

Collections  acquired  by  bureau.        21 

Collins,  G.  N.,  on  origin  of  cotton.        78 

Colorado,  researches  in 11, 20, 22 

Colors,  cardinal — • 

importance  of,  in  beans 69 

importance  of,  in  com 99 

oftheZuni 46 

symbolism  of  the  Zufii 64 

Columbus,  Christopher — 

cited 365 

on  spirit  beliefs 165-169 

Comets,  explanation 259 

Condiment.    See  Flavoring. 

Cone  flower,  used  in  medicine. .        59 

CoNiBo  Indians,  occlusion  of  sight 
among 299-300 

Conserves,  preparation  of,  from 
datil 72-73" 

Constipation,    how    treated    by 
Zufii 57 

Contentment,  legend 380-381 

Coriander  seeds— 

ground  cherry  eaten  with 70 

used  as  food 66 

used  for  drinking 66 

used  for  dyeing 80 

Cormorant,  legend  concerning.  225-226 

Corn — 

beans  used  with 70, 74, 85 

bee  plant  cooked  with 69 

cactus  used  with 69 

clan  names  from 86 

cocklebur  used  with 72 

Eriocoma  seeds  mixed  with ...        67 
lambsquarter  seeds  eaten  with.        66 

mesanamedfor 86 

orache  seeds  eaten  with 66  , 

origin 73 

pigweed  mixed  with 67 

roasting 76 

spirita  associated  with..  228,230-231 

sprouted ,  beverage  from 76 

spurge  used  for  sweetening 68 

tumbleweed  seeds  used  with..        65 

used  as  food 73-76 

used  in  ceremonies 99-100 

used  in  making  he'palolda 75 

used  in  medicine 62 


434 


INDEX 


Corn     Mountain.     See     To'wa     Page 

YAL'LANNi. 

Corn  smut,  used  in  medicine 61 

Cotton — 

cultivation  of 77-78 

plaita  of ,  source 337 

used  in  ceremonies 92,  340 

Cottonwood,  narrow-leaf,  used 
in  ceremonials 97 

CouALiNA,  comets  sent  by 259 

Coudrbau,  H.  a.  (Cou)  cited 152, 

165, 254, 285, 289, 309-310,  329,  355, 375 

Cougar  invoked  in  medicine 59 

Cough,  baboon.    See  Whooping 
cough. 

Courage,  medicine  for 85, 158 

Courting — 

flowers  used  in 64 

methodsof 313-314 

Cousins,  marriage  of 201,  318 

CouvADE,  description  of 320-324 

CoviLLE,  F.  v.,  acknowledgments 
to 38 

Crab  baskets,  character  of 316-317 

Crabs — 

capture 316 

dogs  named  for 307 

legends 316-317,  380 

Crafts,  restrictions  on 292, 302-304 

Cramps,  how  treated  by  Zuni 63 

Crane,  legends  concerning 135, 

335-336,  338 
Creation  of  man,  plants,   and 

ANIMALS 141-148 

Cremation,  object  of 160 

Cr^ivaux,  J.  (Cr) — 

cited 118, 140, 149, 155, 157, 160, 

163,  169,  237,  242-243,  254,  267, 
274,  278,  290,  294,  297,  298,  301, 
304,  308,  309,  810,  311,  313,  314, 
315,  322,  328,  332,  339,  340,  346, 
347,  350,  352,  353,  363,  366,  381 

on  medicine-men 340 

Croton  used  in  medicine 45 

Crownbeard  used  in  medicine.. .        63 
Crystals — 

extracted  from  sick  man 379 

used  as  charms 290-291,  332 

See  also  Stones,  green. 

CUMANAQOTO      INDIANS,      rcligioUS 

beliefs  of 118,139 


Curare —  Page 

nature 285 

preparation  of 292,  303-304,  343 

Curbinata  PISH,  stones  from 371 

Currants,  used  for  food 70 

Cursing,  methods  of 128, 332 

CuRUPAKi.    See  Jurupari. 

Dai-Dai,  description 171, 176 

Daiha  tree,  clothing  made  from..      216 
Dakini    Indians,    disease    treat- 
ment        346 

Dakini    tree,    spirits   associated 

with 228, 232 

Dance,  C.  D.  (Da)— 

cited.  132, 135, 145, 155, 177, 178, 181, 
187,  193,  197,  229,  230,  232,  233, 
236,  251,  260,  261,  262,  268,  274, 
277,  280,  282,  289,  290,  322,  324, 
328,  329,  331,  338,  340,  341,  343, 
345,  346,  354,  356,  357,  358,  359 

on  chUd  spirits 324-325 

Dance-kilts,  symbolism  of 36 

Dancing  in  medical  treatment. . .         55 

d'Anghieri,  p.  M.,  cited 365 

Darina    tree,    spirits    associated 

with 228, 233 

Darkness,  eating  after,  evil  of . . .     184- 

185, 295 
Datil — 

cord  made  from 78-79 

preparation  of,  for  food 72-73 

preparation  of,  for  weaving. . .  78-79 

used  in  basketry 79, 81 

used  in  ceremonies 99 

Datura — 

origin 46 

uses 39, 41, 46-48,  63,  88-91 

Dawn,  Woman  of,  legend 266-267 

Daylight,  origin  of 266-267 

Dead — 

abandonment  of  homes  of . . .  149, 159 

appearance  of 272 

eyes  of 160, 299 

mourning  for 254 

resurrection  of 170, 178, 182 

Death — 

cause.    See  Bush  spirits;  Ka- 
naima;  Sickness. 

flight  of  spirit  at 270 

omens 121, 

274-275, 301-302,  303, 331 

origin 179, 182,  241,  250-251 

Decorating,  plants  used  in 82 


INDEX 


435 


Debe—  Page 

binafor 282 

turtle  and,  legend 212-213 

Depokmities,  cause 187, 371 

DB  GOEJB,  C.  H.  (Go)— 

cited 145, 

159,  278,  286,  296,  297,  304, 
310,  327,  329,  330,  346,  363 

on  belief  in  immortality 149 

on  talismans 288 

Delirium,  how  treated  by  Zufii...        48 

Demakena  Indians,  marriage 318 

Densmohb,  Frances  — 

bulletin    by,    on    Chippewa 

music 23 

work  of 10, 21,  24 

Depons,  F.  (FD)— 

cited 118, 

137, 139, 161,  285,  289, 342, 371 

on  Guacharo  caverns 161-162 

on  medicine-men 350-351 

Devil-doer  thee — 

effects  of 233 

spirits  associated  with 228,  233 

Devil  spirit — 

evil  due  to 349-350 

flagellation 331-332,  350 

Dew,  source  of 260 

Discourtesy,  punishment  for 220 

Disease.    See  Sickness. 

Disobedience,  punishment  for. . .    210- 

211,  219-223 

DiTHYH-EA,  used  in  ceremonies 91 

Dock — 

used  in  ceremonies 98 

used  in  folk-lore 85 

used  in  medicine 59 

Dodge,  J.  R.,  cited 41,47 

Dogs — 

burial'  of,  with  owner 149, 157 

food  of,  restrictions 292,  298,  320 

game  caught  by,  restrictions. .      319 

legend 151 

names 307 

ordeals 280-281 

preparation  of,  for  hunting 282 

training 282-283 

Dogwood — 

clan  name  from 86 

used  in  ceremonies 98 

Dolls — 

curative  powers 331, 347 

description 331 ,  350 


Dolls — (Continued.  Page 

figure  showing 332 

identification 331 

Se€  also  Cemi. 

Dolphin,  legends 242 

DoRLAND,  Dr.  W.  A.  X.,  cited  ...        62 
Dorset,  J.  O.,  Biloxi  material  of..        19 

Doughnuts,  preparation  of 71 

Douglas    spruce,  used  in   cere- 
monies         97 

Dreams — 

beliefs  concerning 165,342 

interpretation 341-342 

legend  concerning 342 

Dream  spirit,  bplief  in._....  152-153,154 

Drink,  souring  of 180 

Drinking,  prevalence  of 20.5 

Drop  seed  grass,  used  in  mats..        81 
Drowning,  reluctance  to  interfere 

with 181-182 

Drum,  used  in  ceremony 43, 55 

Ducks,  legend  concerning 124-125 

Dunn,  J.  P.— 

manuscript  by 24 

work  of 10, 21 

DuRALDE,M.,ling:uisticmaterialof.        18 

Dwarfs,  existence 363 

Dyeing — 

lost  art  of 80 

plants  used  for 80,88,97 

Dtmock, ,  cited 42 

Eagle — 

association  of,  with  rain 267 

portent  of 275 

Eagle-down  fraternity — 

account 38 

medicine  of 61 

Ears,  pulling 372 

Earth  Mother — 

mentioned  in  prayer 37 

plants  derived  from 36 

Earthquake    people    and    the 

piAi,  legend 378, 379 

Eating  after  dark,  evil  of 184, 185 

Eclipses  ,  beliefs  concerning 254- 

256, 257-259 
Edible  plants,  nature  and  use  of.  65-76 

Egg,  broken,  legend  of 323 

Eggs,  used  as  food 381 

Ehrenrbich,  p.  (PE),  cited 121, 

129, 133, 256 

Ekkekuli,  description  of 172 

Emerson,  N.  B.,  work  of 10 


436 


INDEX 


Page 

Emetics  employed  by  Zuni 51, 

55, 58, 59, 60 
Epel,  the  Being  opposed  to  God. .  130 
Epicampes,  used  in  ceremonials..        91 

Epilepsy,  medicine-men  and 333 

Eegot,  employed  by  the  Zuni 63 

Eriooonum,  used  in  ceremonies..        91 

Ekysimum,  used  in  ceremonies 92 

Ethnobotany  op  the  Zuni  In- 
dians, memoir  on 25, 31-102 

Evening  Primrose — 

used  in  ceremonies 87 

used  in  medicine 55 

Ewell,  Dr.  E.  E.,  peyote  analyzed 

by : 41 

Exorcism,  means  of 149, 

163-164, 170, 196-197, 345-353 
Eyes — 

occlusion  of 301,311 

of  dead,  weights  placed  on..  160, 299 

removal  by  spirits 182, 185 

treatment 45, 56, 57, 59, 60 

See  also  Vision. 
Eye-socket  basket,  character  of.      185 

Falcons,  talismans  from 289 

Falls,  spirits  associated  with 235 

Familiar  Spirits — 

belief  in 154 

cultof 167-169 

evil  worked  by 162, 163 

feasts  in  honor  of 167 

invocation  of 167-168, 352 

origin  of 167 

See  also  Bush  Spirits;  Moun- 
tain Spirits;  Sky  Spirits; 
Water  Spirits. 

Fans,  restrictions  on  use  of 303 

Fasting — 

competition  in 223 

ordeals  of 308-309, 314, 319-321 

Fatigue  ,  how  treated  by  Zuni 45 

Feathers — 

handling  of,  conducive  to  in- 
sanity   166,275 

strewing  of,  to  mark  path 132 

Feet,  reversed,  people  with 363 

Fekmin,  p.  (Fe),  cited 291, 313 

Fetish  cult,  traces  of 137-140 

Fever,  how  treated  by  Zufii 45,  53 

Fewkes,  Dr.  J.  W.,  work  of. . .  10, 20, 22 


Field,  clearing  of 131-132, 187, 316 

Fire — 

theft  of 212 

See  also  Great  Fire  pratbb- 
nity. 

Fire  ceremony,  yarrow  used  in..        42 

Fire  making  by  rubbing,  origin 
of  wood  for 133 

FiRESTicKS,  legends 130-136 

Fish — 

beliefs  concerning 371 

binas  for 282, 285 

legend  concerning 220, 234, 262 

method  of  shooting 131 

origin  of 148 

spirits  associated  vrtth 241-244 

See  also  Water  Spirits. 

transformation  into 242 

transportation  of 294 

Fish-mamma,  description  of 241-242 

Fish  nation,  legends  concerning. .     220, 

242, 363 

Fish-poison,  nature  of 234 

Flagellation.    See  Whipping. 

Flavoring — 

coriander  used  as 66 

ground  cherry  used  for 70 

pectis  used  for 69 

Flax.    See  Yellow  flax. 

Fletcher,  Alice  C. — 

manuscript  on  the  Omaha. ...        24 
work  of 10 

Flood,  legends  of 35, 148 

Flowers — 

how  regarded  by  Zufii 63-64 

mythic  creation 46 

Flute — 

origin 178,229 

sun  greeted  by 254 

Folk-lore — 

introduced 371-384 

of  the  Guiana  Indians 26-28, 

103-386 
plantsusedin 84-85 

Food — 

abstinence  from.    See  Fasting. 
burial  of,  with  dead...   149,156-157 

gifts  of,  significance 313 

made  edible 296 

not  eaten  after  dark 184-185, 295 


INDEX 


437 


Page 
Food — Continued . 

restrictions  on 292-298, 

319-321, 348, 352 
See  aUo  Pish;  Game;  etc. 
Footprints — 

curse  directed  at  maker  of 128 

spiiitin •. , 152 

spirit,  markings  ascribed  to. . .      236 
Forest  Spirits.    See  Bush  Spirits. 

Fortunate  Isles,  heaven  in 160 

Four-o'clock.    See   Wild   pour- 
o'clock. 

FowKB,  Gerard,  bulletin  by 23 

Foxes,  study  of  history  of 19, 20 

Frachtenberg,  Dr.  L.  J.,  work  of.        21 

Friendship,  binas  for 286 

Frogs — 

association  of  with  rain 267,370 

charm  made  from 278-279,370 

fire  brought  by 133, 370 

food  brought  by 133, 134, 370 

foretelling  by 274 

hunting  taught  by. .  123, 213-216, 370 

influence  of,  on  hunting 213 

legends 125, 

130-135, 213-214, 215, 218 

music  taught  by 124, 370 

omens  from 274, 370 

used  as  food 191 

used  in  ordeals 278-279 

whipping  of 138-139,370 

Fruits — 

feast  of 230 

origin 146-147 

Fungus,  bad  luck  from 214, 215, 361 

Future  LtPE,  ideas  concerning 149, 

160-163 
Galaxy  PRATBRNirr — 

account 38 

medicines  used  by 48, 49, 52 

Galibi  Indians — 

belief  as  to  God 117 

belief  as  to  spirits 164, 169 

courtship 313-314 

greenstones 291 

medicine-man 349-350 

natal  customs 320, 321 

sickness 349-350 

Gallatin,  Albert,  linguistic  ma- 
terial of 18 

Game — 

restrictions  on 292 

spirits  of,  danger  from 292-294 

transportation  of 294-295 


Page 
Gatschet,    Dr.  A.   S.,    linguistic 

material  of 18, 21 

Gecko,  beliefs  concerning 369 

Geological   forms,    spirits   con- 
nected with 235-236 

Gerard,  W.  R.,  work  of 10, 16 

Gm,  F.  S.,  cited 142,260,366 

GnjA  used  in  medicine 52 

Gill,  De  Lancet,  work  of 23 

Glossary 385-386 

Gluttony.    See  Greediness. 
Goat-suckers— 

beliefs  concerning 274,371 

origin 175-176 

spirit  incarnated  in 174-176 

Gods,  medicines  derived  from 63 

Goeje,  db.    See  de  Goeje. 

Goldenrod  used  in  medicine 60 

GoLBNDHiNA,  use  of,  in  medicine . .        51 
Goodness,  Indian  conception  of. .     149, 

16^-163 

Gourds,  uses  of 67, 88 

Grave,  spirit  remaining  in 149 

Great  Fire  fraternity — 

account 38 

medicines  used  by 44,56 

Greediness,  punishment  for. ...  58, 222 
Green  stones.    See  Stones,  green. 

Greeting,  mode  of 186, 208 

Grillet,   J.,   and  Bechamel,   F. 
(GB)- 

cited 339, 352 

on  beUef  as  to  God 117-118 

Grindstones,  barter  in 203 

Ground  cherry,  use  of 70 

Gruel,  preparation  of 76 

Guacharo    cavern,    birds    and 

spirits  in 161, 175 

GuAHiBO  Indians — 

customs 254 

marriage 314 

spellscastby 332 

Guamo  Indians — 

beliefs  as  to  spirits 181 

talismans  of 287 

GuayAna  Indians,  eclipses  among.      258 
GuAYQUiME  Indians — 

beliefs  of,  as  to  spirits 181 

marriage  customs 314 

propitiation  of  spirits 197 

Guiana  Indians — 

animism  and  folk-lore  of 26-28, 

103-386 
work  among 107 


438 


INDEX 


Page 

Gulf  of  Mexico,  tribes  of 19 

GUMILLA,  J.  (G) — 

cited 145, 146, 156, 157, 159, 162, 

165, 170, 181, 254, 257-258, 269, 
276, 289, 290, 295, 303, 307-309, 
314, 315, 325, 328, 331, 333, 343, 
352,  362,  367,  368,  369,  370,  376 
on  belief  in  a  Supreme  Being.  117, 138 

on  medicine-man 339 

on  name  for  Supreme  Being. .  117, 118 

on  skunks ...i 368 

on  twins 325 

GuRLEY,J.  G.,  work  6f 22 

Gypsies,  use  of  Stramonium  by. . .        41 


Habuei — 

identification  of 119, 120 

legends  concerning.  119, 120, 122-125 
See  also  HaeiwaIi;  Yaperi-Kum. 

Hahnemann,    —    — ,    cited    on 
Stramonium 41 

Haida  Indians,  linguistic  mate- 
rial         19 

Hair,  medicine  for  removing 44 

Hair  brushes,  blue  grama  used 
for 83 

Hair  combing,  restrictions  on . . .  312, 313 

Halian,  acknowledgments  to 38 

Haller, ,  cited . . : 42 

Hammock — 

bringing  in  of,  significance 313 

superstitions  concerning 303 

Handbook  of  American  Indians  .      10, 
16, 18, 19, 20, 21 

Handbooks  in  preparation. 10 

Hariwali — 

identification  of 120 

legends  concerning 120-122 

See  also  Alubiri. 

Harrington,  J.  P.,  acknowledg- 
ments to .  L 38 

Hartsinck,  J.  J.,  on  two-fingered 
negroes 364 

Hatred,  sign  of 300-301 

Hauyari  dance,  object  of 156 

Hawah,  bibliography  of 17 

Hawk — 

legend 373 

origin 121 

portents  from 275 

Head,  standing  on,  in  order  to  see 
upward 127,173 


Headache,  how  treated  by  Zufii. .       45, 

50, 52, 53, 62 
Head  flattening,  objects  of. . .  278, 280 

Heart,  spirit  in 153, 167 

Heaven,  ideas  concerning..  149,160-163 
Hebus — 

description 173-174 

legends 126-129,131, 

132, 174, 180, 183, 186-187, 189, 

190,  210,  287,  292-293,  337-338 

See  also  Bush  Spirits. 

Hbdley,  Charles,  dedication  to.       105 

Heffter,  Dr.,  peyote  studies  by. .        41 

Hemorrhage,    how    treated    by 

Zuili 43,  62 

Hemorrhoids,    how    treated    by 

Zuni 61 

Henkbl,  Alice,  acknowledgments 

to..., 38 

Heroes,    tribal,  confused   with 

gods 117,119 

Hewitt,  J.  N.  B.,  work  of 16, 19, 52 

Haiari  tree — 

origin 234 

spirits  associated  with 228,233 

HiLHOUSE,  W.  (Hi) — 

cited. .  125, 126, 305, 307, 355, 357-358 
on  belief  in  God 119, 120, 145 

HO-ARANNI —  , 

legends  concerning 244:- 

245, 248, 250-251 
See  also  Water  Spirits. 

Hodge,  F.  W.— 

acknowledgments  to 38 

note  on  accompanying  papers.  25-28 
work  of 10, 16 

Hogs,  wild,  legend  of 260 

Holmes,  W.  H. — 

acknowledgments  to 38 

report  of g 

work  of 10, 12, 22 

Homeopathic  principlb,  in  Zuni 
medicine 48 

Hominy,  preparation  of 76 

Honey,  why  scarce,  legend 204 

Honey-bee  son-in-law — 

legend 199-200 

See  also  Bees. 

Hopi — 

cultivation  of  cotton  by 77,  78 

use  of  Amaranthus  by 74,  87 

Horse,  imitation  of,  by  spirits 176- 

177, 242 


INDEX 


439 


Page 
Horse  WEED,  used  in  medicine. . .        55 
Hough,  Dt.  Walter,  acknowledg- 
ments to 38 

HhdliSka,  Dr.  A.,  work  of 10, 22 

HuBDiHi.    See  Alubiri. 

HtJMBOLDT,    A.  VON  (AVH) — 

cited 117, 

136, 137, 139, 145, 146, 161, 162, 
170, 171,  290, 297, 364, 365-366 

on  orang-utang 366 

on  worship  of  IJie  trumpet .      137 

Hummingbirds — 

beliefs  concerning 371 

legends  concerning.  210,211,228,334 

tobacco  brought  by 334-336,371 

used  at  menstruation  festival. .      312 

Hun'ki,  acknowledgments  to 38 

Hunting — 

Bush  Spirits  excellent  at 185 

dogs  for,  training  of 281-283 

luckin 200 

medicine-men  and 338, 341 

omens  in 275 

ordeals  preparatory  to 277-281 

women  not  taken 194, 226 

Huracan,  meaning  of 171 

HuRi.    See  Fish  nation. 

HuRONi.    See  Fish  nation. 

Husband — 

lying-in  of 320-322 

status  of 187, 1 90-191, 200-201 

■See  also  Couvade;  Marriage 
customs. 

Husband's    spirit,    murder    by, 
legend 182 

HUTA-KUBAKURA — 

legend  concerning 129 

See  also  Hebu. 
Hyorokon,  mischief  done  by 181 

IcHEiBi.    See  Familiar  Spirits. 

Idiots,  beliefs  concerning 166 

Idol  cult — 

traces  of 137-140 

See  also  Dolls. 

Iguana,  talismans  from 289 

Illinois,  collection  from 22 

III  omen,  birds  of 274-276 

Illustrations  for  publications. . .        23 

Immawari,  description  of 174 

Immortality — 

of  body,  belief  in. .  149-150, 151-152 

of  spirit,  belief  in 149,154 


Page 
Importance,    denoted    by    "big- 
ness"   192-193 

IM  Thubn,  E.  F.  (IT)— 

cited 118, 130, 163, 225, 240, 

242, 243, 254, 278, 279, 294, 296, 
298,  304, 313, 314, 333, 341, 381 

on  dreams 165 

on  ordeals 280,281 

on  spirits 175,244 

Incantations,  beUef  in 327 

Indiana,  researches  in 11, 21 

Indian  paint  brush  bare,  used 

for  dyeing 80 

Inirida  Indians,  belief  as  to  God.      117 
Insionla  op  medicine-men.  327, 329-333 
See    also    Crystals;    Dolls; 
Kickshaws;  Battle. 

Invisibility,  power  of 341 

Invocation,  mode  of 167, 

178, 192, 347-351 

loLOKiAMO,  mischief  done  by 187 

Iroquois,  sketch  of  grammar  of.. .        20 
Irving,  Washington  (WI) — 

on  fountain  of  youth 151 

on  immortality 151-152 

Island,  formation  of 221 

Itb  tree — 

flour  made  from 122,233 

fruit 206,342 

man  formed  from 145 

nature 285 

spirits  associated  with. .  228,232-233 

Jamestown  weed.    See  Datura. 
Jenman,  G.  S.  (Je),  on  occlusion  of 

vision 299 

Jesuit  Fathers,  writings  of 20 

Jiggers.    See  Chigoes. 

JiVARO  Indians,  vomiting  among. .      295 

Jonah,  parallel  to 244-245 

JUBUPAKI — 

charm  against 181 

description 174 

festival 179,229 

music  used  in  ceremonies 138 

storms  caused  by 270 

Kaieteur  Fall,  legend 237 

Kanaima — 

evil  done  by  . .  346-347, 348, 354-355 

explanation 354-355 

forms 354,356 

origin 355 


440 


INDEX 


Page 
KA.NAI1IA — Continued . 

recognition 356, 361 

tree  of  same  name,  properties. .      354 
See  also  Vengeance. 
Kappler,  a.  (AK),  cited  229, 232, 295-296 

Kere-Kbke-miyu-au,  legend 130 

Keymis,  L.,  cited 291 

KiA'KWEMOsi,  use  of  Euphorbia  by       52 

KiCKAPOO,  study  of  history  of 19 

Kickshaws,  conjuring  by..  329,332-333 
Kidneys,  how  stimulated  by  Zuni.  45, 53 

King, ,  cited.. 42,51,62 

Kingfisher,  plumage  of,  origin. . .      212 
Kingston,  R.  L.,  on  natal  customs      323 

Kiowa,  peyote  used  by 41 

KiRKB,  H.  (Ki),  cited.. .  243, 282, 304-305 
KiBKEDEE     BIRD,    hoaddress    of, 

origin.. 212 

Kissing,  forms  of 163-164 

KNfVES,  nature  of 127,191 

KoB^UA  Indians,  beliefs  of 270, 325 

KoB^wA.    See  Kob:£ua. 

KocH-GRiJNBERG,  T..  (KG),  cited.     118, 

119, 138, 140, 149, 153, 156, 162,  165, 

170, 174, 271, 289, 290, 304, 306,  307, 

314,322,325,329,341,  347,  362,  364 

KoPA,  spirits  associated  with  228, 231-232 

KoKERiTE,  nature  of 186 

Ko'ZiUwala'wa,  a  mythic  locality.  50, 54 
KoMATARi,  the  first  medicine-man, 

legend 1 336-338 

Ko'mokatsi,  a  Zuni  goddess 44, 52 

Konehu.    See  Brer  rabbit. 
KoNESO.    See  Brer  rabbit. 
KoNOKo-KUYUHA,     legends    con- 
cerning   185, 188, 189-190, 193 

KorobohXna,  legend  of,  on  origin 
of  man 141-142 

KOROIOMANNA.      See  KOROROMAN- 

na. 
kororomanna — 

identification 119 

legends 125-126,150 

man  created  by 126, 142 

origin 125 

Krogstad,   Dt.  H.,  acknowledg- 
ments to 38 

KUIIMINA — 

legends  concerning 126 

woman  created  by 126,142 

KURRI-KURRI      bird,      CUIsiug     of, 

rain  caused  by 267, 345 

Kururumanni.  See  Kororoman- 


Page 

Kwamaraka,  evil  due  to 349 

KwA-MTJHU,  legend  concerning....      129 
Kwe'iiEle,  a  Zufii  deity 56 

Labor,  women  in — 

treatment  of 322, 346 

See  also  Children;  Lying-in. 

La  Flesche,  Francis,  work  of 10 

Lake  Huron,  tribes  of 19 

Lake  MicmoAN,  tribes  of 19 

Lambsquarter  used  as  food 66 

Lance,  agate,  of  the  Zuni 46 

Landmarks,  legends  concerning. .      238 

Laughter,  punishment  for 222, 263 

Laziness,  cure  of,  legend 380 

Leary,  Ella,  work  of 23 

Leaves,  invocation  by 350 

Legs — 

in  folk-lore 173, 262-265 

spears  formed  from... 195-196 

Lettuce,  wild,  used  for  chewing 

gum 68 

Lb  win;  Dr.,  observations  on  pey- 
ote          41 

Library  of  the  Bureau,  report 

on,the 23 

Lice,  eating  of 133, 135 

Licking  of  sticks,  custom  of...  311, 360 

Linn^us  cited 42 

Lister,  Sir  J.,  cited 41,63 

List  op  plants 101-102 

Literature  on  Guiana,  key  to.  111-116 
LrrTLE  Fire  fraternity — 

medical  practice  of 39, 49 

use  of  Datura  by 46 

Lizards — 

binas  from 288 

transformation  of 245 

LolXca    Indians,    beliefs    as    to 

eclipses 257 

Louisiana,  researches  in 11, 18, 19 

Love,  binas  for 285-288 

Lye  ,  use  of ,  in  making  hominy ....        74 
Lying-in — 

house  for 250,321-322 

of  husband 320-322 

of  wife 321-322 

See  also  Labor. 
Maboya — 

eclipses  caused  by 255 

nature 163, 165, 177 

smell 177 

storms  caused  by 269 

See  also  Bush  Spirits. 


INDEX 


441 


Page 
Macaws,  beliefs  concerning.  243, 275, 371 
McClintock — 

cited 320,339,340,352 

on  burial  of  dead 154-155 

McGthre,   J.   D.,   collection  pre- 
sented by 22 

MACaERANTHERA — 

legend  concerning 94 

used  in  ceremonies 94-95 

Magicians,  existence 351-353 

Mahtji.    See  Kanaima. 

Maihisieibi.    See  Mansinskiri. 

Maine,  antiquities  from 22 

Maipurb  Indians,  legends  of,  on 
creation 142, 145 

Maize.    See  Corn. 

MAKAi-ABi.Ni,  invocation  of 192, 349 

Makonadia.    See  Makunaima. 

Maeuari  Dance — 

object  of 156 

whips  used   in,    legend    con- 
cerning   228-229 

Maku  Indians,  burial  customs  of. .      158 

Makunaoia,  legends  concerning. .     119, 
130-136, 148, 199, 239 

Makusi  Indians — 

beliefs 160, 

164, 165, 235, 236, 239, 260, 261 

burial  customs 155-156,157 

comets 259 

couvade 322, 324 

exorcism 197 

food  laws 296, 297 

legends 135, 145, 152, 259 

marriage  ordeals 314, 316 

medicine-men 341, 343,  351-352 

menstruation 310,  311-312 

names 306 

natal  customs 322,  323,  324 

ordeals 278, 281,  308, 310 

poisoning  ascribed  to 346-347 

puberty 308, 310,  312 

sickness 341, 351-352, 358 

talismans 290 

vengeance 356-357,  358 

Man — 

creation 126, 141-146,  228 

place  of  origin 141 

transformation  to  animal 199 

Manahatj.    See  Ekkekttli. 

Manati— 

identification 241 

origin 227, 245 

used  as  food 297 


Pag» 
Manicole  FHurr,  ripening  of,  festi- 
val at 138 

Manikin.    See  Dolls. 
Mansinskiri — 

description  of 172,193-194 

legend  concerning 172-173 

Manufactures,  restrictions  on 292, 

302-304 

Manuscripts,  report  on 24 

Mapoje.    See  Mapota. 
Mapota  Indians — 

beliefs  of,  as  to  creation 145-146 

astospirita 181,197 

marriage  customs  of 314 

Mapoye.    See  Mapota. 
Makaka.    See  Rattle. 

Marching,  procedure  in 256 

Mari-mari  dance,  description  of.      207 
Marriage — 

binasfor 285-288 

communal  form.  190-191, 200-201,  222 

customs 314-318 

ordeals 308, 309, 314-318 

prerequisites 187 

presage 275 

tasks 131-132,187,316-318 

Maryland,  antiquities  from 22 

Mascoutens,  study  of  history  of. .        19 

Mask  dances,  objects 156 

Massi  poison.    5ee  Wassi. 

Mats,  manufacture 79, 81 

Matthews,      Ih.     Washington, 

cited 25, 37, 42, 67 

MawAri — 

invocation 349 

legend  of  tobacco  smoke  and. .  192 
Maya  Indians,  beliefs  on  creation  229 
Medical  practices  of  the  Zufii. . .        39 

Medicinal  plants  of  the  Zufii 39-64 

Medicine-man       and       carrion 

crows,  legend 343-345 

Medicine-men — 

account 327-353 

apprenticeship 338-340 

basket 329 

belief  in  own  powers 327 

bench 192,  330 

disease  cured  by 345-353 

dreams  interpreted  by 341-342 

duties 36,37,340-353 

evil  due  to 327-328 

fees 327,348,351,353 

house 334 

influence  over  women 353 


442 


INDEX 


Page 
Medicine-men — Gontinued . 

insignia 327, 329-333 

See    also    Dolls;    Kick- 
shaws; Rattle. 

knowledge 338,  340,  343 

marks 329 

names 306,327-328 

•offerings  to 327, 348,  351,  353 

ordeals 338-340 

origin 135, 336-338 

propitiation  by 329 

respect  for. 327, 328-329 

restrictions 328, 340 

sex 334 

spirits 266 

status 327-329 

succession 333 

Memory,  impairment 276 

Menstruation — 

hut  for  women  during. .  250, 311-313 

inducing  of 52 

ordeals  at 308-309, 310-311 

restrictions  at  time  of 199-200, 

241, 250, 311-313 

spirit  amativeness  at  time  of . .    "241, 

248-249 

See  also  Puberty. 

Mermaid,  legends  concerning. . . .      251 

Mesa  Verde  National  Park 20,  22 

Me'she,  Zuni  assistant 37 

Metamorphosis,  occurrence  of. . .     149, 
150-151, 182, 184-185, 199, 257 
Mexico — 

bulletin  on  languages  of 19 

linguistic  families  of 23 

Miami  Indians — 

linguistic  manuscript  on 24 

study  of 19, 21 

Michigan,  early  tribes  of 20 

Migration  of  the  Zuni 35 

Milk,  human — 

antidote  for  snake  bite 243 

how  increased  in  mothers 51 

Milkweed — ■ 

ceremonial  use  of  fiber 77, 88 

used  as  food 65-66 

weaving  of  fiber 77 

Milky  Way,  origin  of 260 

Millspaugh, ,  cited 48 

Mimicking,  anger  of  spirit  at 194 

Misery,  origin  of 179 

Mississippi  valley,  tribes  of 19 


Page 
Mississippi    Valley    Historical 

Association 15, 18 

Missouri,  bulletin  on  antiquities 

of 23 

Modeling,  nature  of 139-140 

Mohave — 

use  of  Datura  by 41, 47 

Mohawk,  study  of  language  of 20 

Moles,  cause  of 326 

Mongolian  spot,  cause  of 326 

MoNiKO  Indians,  modeling  among      140 
Monkeys — 

beliefs  concerning 366 

used  for  food 295, 297 

See   also    Baboons;    Okang- 

UTANGS. 

Moon — 

eclipse  of: 257-259,  296 

greeting  to 257 

influence  of,  on  pottery. ....  257,  302 

menstruation  due  to 256 

origin 256 

sex 254,  256 

spirit..  254 

spots 256 

Moon  Mother,  shrine  of  the 35 

Moon,  Mountains  of 235 

Moon  sickness.    See  Menstrua- 
tion. 

MooNEY,  James — 

cited  on  peyote 41 

work  of 10, 16, 18 

MooHE,  R.,  collection  presented 
by 22 

Mora  tree,  spirits  associated  with.     228, 

232-233 

Morgan,  Dr.  F.  P.,  cited 41 

Morning  Star,  legend  of 142, 260 

Moss,  place  named  for 86 

Mother-in-law,  taboo  concerning.      344 

Mountain  Spirits — 

account  of 235-240 

beUefin 154 

originof 154 

Mourning,  restrictions  during 296 

Mush — 

forms  of,  preparation 74-76 

used  for  the  dying lOO 

Music 

Chippewa — 

bulletin  on 23,24 

studyof 21 

Zufii 64 


INDEX 


443 


Page 
Nation  de  la  Foubchb  ,  history  of.        19 

Nai'tjchi — 

acknowledgments  to 38 

medical  knowledge  of 40, 46 

Names — 

derived  from  plants 37,86 

exchange 191, 306-307 

giving 305-307,345 

mention 304r-305 

restrictions 292, 304-307 

spirit  objections  to  mention.  240,241 
Nanyobo,  legend  concerning. . .  132-133 

Narcotics  used  by  Zuni 37, 41, 46 

Nakrow-leap  COTTONWOOD,  used 

in  ceremonies 96-97 

Natal  customs — 

description 319-325 

explanation 324-325 

See  also  Children;  Couvade; 
Pregnancy. 

Natchez,  linguistic  material  of 18, 19 

Navaho  Indians — 

pectis  used  by 57 

pinon  nuts  furnished  by,  to 

Zuni 70 

Navarrete,  R.  db — 

on  belief  in  God 119 

on  guarding  traditions 345 

Navels,  men  with  mouths  at 364 

Nazco,  Peru,  collection  from 22 

Nettle.    See  Bull  nettle. 

Neutrals,  hostility  of  the 20 

New  Mexico,  researches  in 11, 16 

Nichols,  Frances  S.,  work  of 17 

Nigger  weed,  used  in  ceremonials        98 

NoHi-ABASSi,  legend  of 263-264 

Noise  making,  punishment  for. . .      184 

NORDENSKIOLD,      ErLAND      (Nor), 

cited 238 

Nosebleed,  cure 43 

No-siNO,,evil  due  to 349 

Nose-stinging,  ordeal  of 278, 280 

NouRAGUE  Indians,  belief  as  to 

God  among 117 

Nudity — 

explanation  of 303 

shame  of 381 

Nuts,  piSon,  preparation  and  stor- 
age of 70 


Page 

Ofo,  study  of  language. .., 19 

Ojana  Indians — 

names 304 

ordeals 278,309-310 

sickness 346 

Oklahoma,  researches  in 11, 18, 21 

Okona-kuha.  See  Morning  Star. 

Okoyumo— 

evil  due  to 349 

legends  concerning.  248-249, 251-252 

Omaha  Indians,   manuscript  on 
the 24 

Omar,  legend  concerning 244 

Omens — 

nature  of 271-277 

See  also  III  omen. 

Onions,  ground  cherry  used  with.        70 

Onondaga  Indians— 

study  of  language  of 20 

text  in  language  of 19 

Opossum.    5ee  Bush-rat. 

Orache  used  as  food 66 

Oeang-utangs,  fables 363, 366 

Ordeals — 

nature  of. .  277-281, 308-325, 338-341 
See  also  Children;  Marriage; 
Medicine-men;  Puberty. 

Oregon,  researches  in 11 

Oriyu — 

damage  done  by 250-251 

guardian  spirit  of  boats 242 

legends  concerning 242, 246, 251 

Ornaments,  burial  of,  with  dead  .     149, 

156-157 

Oroan  ,  eclipses  due  to 254r-255 

Oruperi — 

identification  of 120 

legends  concerning 120 

See  also  Alubiri. 

Otomac  Indians — 

belief  in  paradise 161 

belief  in  petrifaction  of  body . .      152 

burial  customs 145-146,254 

eclipses 258 

legendary  origin 145 

Ottawa  Indians  ,  reference  to 20 

OuAYANA  Indians,  beliefs 363 

Owls — 

legends  concerning 212,276 

origin  of 266 

portents  of 274 


444 


INDEX 


Page 
Otambi  Indians — 

food 381 

ordeals 338-339 

■  sickness 350 

Paddling,  teaching  of,  to  men 221 

Pain,  origin  of 179 

Paiute  Indians,  Datura  used  by  .  47 
Palmer, Dr.  Edward,  cited.  47, 49, 51, 67 
Pan-American    Scientific    Con- 
gress    12 

Papa-uira  BiRD,'binas  from 288 

Paradise.    See  Heaven. 

Parrots,  origin 142 

Parsnip,  water,  place  named  for.  86 

Pascagoula,  study  of  the 18 

Paxiuba  PALM,  flutes  made  from..  229 

Pectis  used  for  perfumery 83 

Peoria,  linguistic  manuscript  on .  24 

Pepper-pot,  preparation 303 

Peppers — 

burning  of,  for  defense 293 

increase  of,  belief  concerning.  269 

occlusion  of  vision  by 298- 

299, 300,  301 

used  in  ordeals 310 

See  also  Chile. 

Perfumery,  pectis  used  for 83 

Perspiration,   how   induced   by 

Zuni 53 

Peru — 

collections  from 22 

researches  in 11 

Petrifaction  after  death,  belief 

in 152 

Peyote  used  by  Indians.. 1 41 

Photography — 

report  on 23 

restrictions  on 292,299 

Pl*.,  legends  concemir^ 119, 133-135 

PlAI   AND   THE    EARTHQUAKE   PEO- 
PLE, legend 378-379 

PlAI  MEN — 

origin  of 135 

See  also  Medicine-men. 

PiAPOCo  Indians — 

beliefs 242, 297 

disease 347 

menstruation 313 

PiiHOA  Indians — 

burial  customs x  157 

food  laws 297 

use  of  spells 155 


Page 
Pigweed,  winged,  used   to  con- 
fuse enemy 84 

See  also  Amakanthus. 
Pike,  Albert,  linguistic  material 

of 18 

Pima,  use  of  Datura  by 41 

PiNCKARD,  G.  (Pnk),  cited 232, 

332, 334 

PiSON — 

preparation  of,  for  food 70 

used  in  ceremonies 96 

used  in  medicine 42, 43,  57 

Pioji  Indians,  vomiting 295 

Pipes,  use  of 95 

PiRAi  PISH,  legends 244 

Pitou,  L.  a.  (LAP),  cited.. 170, 

282,  294,  302,  309, 310, 340 
Places,  names   of    derived   from 

plants 86 

Plants — 

binas  from 281-284, 285-287 

Bush  Spirits  associated  with .  228-234 

creation 146-148 

edible 65-76 

folk-lore 84-85 

index  list 101-102 

man  derived  from 144^145,228 

mythic  origin 46 

omens 277 

uses 39-101 

/See  oJso  Basketry;  Cere- 
monies; Decorating; 
Dyeing;  Folk-lore; 
Toilet;  Weaving. 

Zuni  conception  of 37 

See  also  Zuni,  plants  of. 

Playground,  made  by  birds 226 

Pleiades,  legends  concerning. .  262-266 

Pliny,  cited 42 

Pointing,  objections  to 239-240, 271 

Poisoning — 

practice  of 343, 358-359 

See  also  Curare. 

Poison  oak,  place  named  for 86 

Poles,  used  in  boating 221 

Popped  corn,  preparation  of 76 

Population,  Indian,  investigation 

of 18 

Porpoise — 

beliefs  concerning 243 

origin 121,  245 

Portraits,  restrictions  on 299 


INDEX 


445 


Page 

Possession,  demoniac,  belief  in. .      168 

Po8Tsofahouse,abilitytospeak.  125,  233 

Pot,  lucky,  legend  of 302, 303 

Potatoes — 

sweet,  aversion  of  spirits  for. . .      179 

transformation  of 246 

used  for  food 71 

PoTAWATOMi,  study  of  history  of. . .  19,  20 

Pot-spoon,  washing 241,  252,  267 

Pottery — 

clay  for,  restrictions 302-303 

plants  used  in  decoration  of . . .        82 

Powell,  J.  W. — 

cited 35 

monument  to 15 

Powis — 

binafor 282 

legend , 201-202 

Prayer — 

before  medical  treatment 63 

Indian  name  for 300 

in  treatment  of  snake  poison..        54 

Prayer  sticks  of  the  Zuni 86 

Pregnancy — 

desirefor 187,286,288 

origin 323, 326 

restrictions  during 300, 

304, 319-320, 323-324 
See    aho    Children;    Natal 
customs. 

Pregnant  women,  liking  of  Bush 
Spirits  for 177,181,187 

Premonitions,  belief  in 272,  273 

Prenatal  influence,  effect  of . . .      326 

Prentiss,  Dr.  D.  W.,  cited  on  pe- 
yote 41 

Priesthood  of  the  Bow — 

accoimt 48 

medical  practice  of 49, 52 

Primrose,    evening,    ceremonial 
use 87 

Prophecy,  medicine-men  and 342 

Propitiation  of  dead,  modes  of .  155-156 

Puberty — 

ordeals 301,308-313 

confusedwith  marriage  ordeals.      308 
See  also  Menstruation. 

Publications,  report  on 22 

PuccooN — 

used  in  ceremonials 93-94 

used  in  medicine 56 

used  in  war "4 


Page 
Pueblo  Indians — 

reference  to. 35 

researches  among 16 

Pufpb  ALLS  used  as  food 69 

PuiNAvi  Indians,  puberty  among.      311 

Pulse,  spirit  in 153 

PupoMBo.    See  Kwa-muhu. 
Purgatives  employed  by  Zuni. . .  45,  58 

Purification  of  body  parts 58 

Purple  dye,  source  of 88 

Purrunaminari,  man  created  by.      142 
Puzzle,  to  deceive  spirits. . .  180-181, 197 

Queensland,  cannibalism  in 158 

QUELCH,  J.  J. — 

on  clay  models 140 

on  poison  makii^ 304 

Rabbit.    See  Brer  EABBrr. 

Rabbit  brush — 

blossoms  of,  used  for  basketry.        81 
stems  of,  used  for  dyeing 80 

Radin,  Paul,  manuscript  by 24 

Ragweed  used  in  medicine 51 

Rain — 

averting 268 

ceremonial  procedure  for 36, 

37,  89,  91,  97 

effect  on  sickness 348 

making  of 254, 267-268, 345 

signs 269, 275 

Rainbow — 

beliefs  concerning 268 

personification 170, 268 

Rain-progs — 

legends 125, 195-196, 198 

origin 125 

See  also  Frogs. 

Rain  priests — 

account 36 

DaJitra  used  by 52 

Euphorbia  used  hy 52 

medicines  of 39 

Rattle— r 

description 330-331 

origin 246,  331, 336,  337-338 

spirits  compelled  by 43, 

55, 149, 163-164,  231,  246 

stones  for j 330 

taboo  to  common  people 330,331 

use 347,350 

warnings  given  by 222 

Rattlesnake,  bite  of,  how  treated      53, 

58,  61,  63 


446 


INDEX 


Page 
Battle  SNAKE  featernitt,  medi- 
cine of 61 

Eeagan,  J.  P.,  work  of 10 

Bed  dyes — 

source  of 80 

talisman  from 290 

Repeeence,  works  of,  key  to 113-116 

Eejuvenation,  legends    concern- 
ing   149-150, 151 

Religion,  no  persecution  for 328 

Reseaech  WORK,  report  on 9 

Retaliation.    See  Vengeance. 
Rheumatism,     how     treated     by 

Zuni 50,  55,  62 

Rhinitis,  how  treated  by  Zimi 55 

Rice,  occurrence 376 

BlVEES — 

origin  of  men  from 146 

spirits 241 

RocHEPOBT,  C.  DE,  and  Poincy, 
L.  DE  (RoP)— 

cited 153,  161, 

163,  165,  167,  177,  254,  259,  269, 
272,  278,  280,  295,  296,  297,  303, 
304,  306,  307,  320,    353,    369,  371 

on  medicine-men 351 

Rock — 

feet  turned  into 194 

heaps  of,  significance 238 

man  created  from. .  145, 222, 237-238 

man  changed  to 152, 235, 237-238 

Rock  sculptures,  origin  of.  136, 237, 242 

Rock  spieits,  propitiation  of 300 

Rocks,  submbeged,  tests  for. . .  220, 361 
Rocky  Mountain  bee  plant — ■ 

used  for  decorating  pottery. . .        82 

used  in  ceremonies 96 

Rodriguez,  B.,  cited 256 

RoDWAY,  J. ,  cited 119, 282, 345 

RojAS,  A.  (AR),  cited 118,137,260 

RoEAiMA,  Mount — 

abiding  place  on 135, 236 

spiritson 239 

torrents  from 236 

Rose,  Dr.  J.  N.,  acknowledgments 

to 38 

Rot,  Spieit  op,  legend 230-231 

Roth,  W.  B.— 

on   animism  and  folk-lore  of 

Guiana  Indians 26-28, 103-386 

work  of . ., 103, 107 


ROTJCOUYENNE   INDIANS— 

burial  customs ,  157, 159-160 

.dogs,  food  of 298 

food 381 

hunting  customs j .  282, 294 

natal  customs 320 

ordeals 309, 310, 340 

sickness 352 

Rushes,  place  named  for 86 

Sagard,  Theodat  G.,  cited 20 

Sagebrush — 

used  iq  ceremonies 87 

used  in  folk-lore 88 

St.  Clair,  T.  S.  (StC),  cited 239, 

283, 329, 330 

St.  Vincent,  antiquities  from 21 

Saliba.    See  Saltva  Indians. 
Saliva  Indians— 

belief  as  to  God 117 

burial  customs 156, 158 

eclipses 257-258 

festivals 138 

legendary  origLa 142, 

143, 145, 146, 254 

twins 320,325 

Salt-bush — 

used  in  ceremonies 88 

used  in  medicine 44 

Sandals,  use. 212 

Sandhill  crane  beans,  used  in 

folk-lore 85 

San  Ildeponso,  researches  at 16 

Santa  Barbara  Mission,  model 

of 15 

Santa  Clara,  researches  at 16 

Sauk,  study  of  history  of 19, 20 

Scalping,  legend  concerning 176 

Scarification  as  ordeal 277-279, 

310, 314, 321, 339 

Schlbsier,  Dr. ,  cited 47 

Schomburgk,  R.  (ScR) — 

cited 119, 120, 125, 130, 136, 137, 

140, 142, 145, 146, 150, 152, 155, 
159, 161, 164, 166, 196-197, 225, 
235, 238, 243, 257, 259-261, 268, 
271-272, 289-291,  295-297,  300, 
302, 304,  306, 308-313,  316,  321, 
322,  324,  327,  328,  331,  333, 340, 
346,  353-361,  365, 367, 369, 370 

on  Amazons 365 

on  medicine-men 350 


INDEX 


447 


ScHOMBUBGK,  E.  H.  (ScA),  cited.  164, 
166, 197,  235, 237, 238, 239, 274, 
278,  289,  298,  825,  332, 341, 381 

Scorpions,  talismans  from 289 

ScRUB-TTjKKEY,  legend  of 173 

Sea,  spirits  of 241 

Searles,  Stanley,  work  of 22 

Seneca,  study  of  language  of 20 

Septilture,    places  of,   abandon- 
ment   149,159 

Sehekong  Indians — 

beliefs  of 164 

legend 378 

Seven  Stars,  The,  legends  con- 
cerning   262-266 

Sex— 

forecasting  of .\.      274 

influencing  of 84,96 

Sexttal  life,  customs  of 309-326 

Shadows,  spirit  in 152-153, 

154, 170, 250, 263, 299 

Sbame,  death  from 381 

Sharks — 

dogs  named  for 307 

legend  concerning 251, 264 

Shawneetown,     III.,     collection 

from 22 

Sheep,  medicine  given  to 54 

Shell — 

beads  of,  used  in  medicine. . .        50 

myths 44 

Shields,  use 383 

Shrines  of  the  Zuni 35 

Shu'maakwe  fraternity — 

meaning  of 44 

medicines  used  by 43, 

44, 46, 50, 52, 55, 56 

Shu'maikoli,  Zuni  deities 48 

Shuttlecock,  formation  of,  from 

husks 100 

Sickness — 

cause 170, 

181, 182, 241, 250-251, 
266, 345-346,  348,  349 

cure 182, 290, 338, 345-353 

effect  of  rain  on 348 

forecasting  results  of . . .  233, 275, 331 
objects  extracted  from   body 

in 346, 352, 361, 379 

restrictions  during 296, 348 

SiLETz  Indians,  study  of  language 
of 21 


Page, 
SiLK-COTTON  TREE — 

formation  of  man  from 144-145 

power  of  motion  credited  to.  229r230 

spirits  associated  with 228, 

229-230, 231 

SiLVBRBALLI   TREE — 

effects  of 233 

spirits  associated  with 228, 233 

SiMSON,  A.  (AS),  cited. : 283, 

289, 295, 297, 325, 361 

Sirsi  Indlans — 

beliefs  of,  as  to  future  lite 162 

festivals  of 138 

Size,  importance  denoted  by  . ..  192-193 

Skin —  / 

change  of 149-151 

diseaseof,howtreatedbyZTiai.        60 
effect  of  plant  on 62 

Skunk,  occurrence 368 

Sky  Spirits — 

account  of 254-270 

belief  in.... 154, 254r-270, 

houses 266 

invocation 266, 

laughing  at 263 

origin 254, 

sex 254-256 

See  also  Comets;  Moon;  Stars; 
Sun;  etc. 

Slaves,  burial  of,  with  master 157 

Sloth — 

influence  on  pregnant  woman.      204 

legend 204 

omen  from 274, 369 

Smartwebd,  use  of,  in  medicine. .        58 

Smell,  spirits  known  by 170, 177 

Smoking,  practice  of 52, 95 

Snags  in  rivers,  cause 382 

Snake-bush — 

origin  of 232 

spirits  associated  with 228, 232 

Snake  dances,  nature  of 139 

Snakes — 

amativeness 128, 

139, 143-144, 313, 370, 378 

binas  from 234, 283, 370 

bitesof,  cure 243 

eating  of 319 

fangs  used  in  vengeance 359 

killing  of,  rain  caused  by. . .  267, 370 

legends 238,  284 

origin  of  men  from 143-144,  370 


448 


INDEX 


Snakes — Continued.  Page 

species 283-284 

symbol  of  life 149-150, 370 

See    also    Camudi;     Battle- 
snake. 

Snakeweed — 

used  in  ceremonies 92-93 

used  in  medicine 53 

Sneezing,  beliefs  concerning 271 

Snow  blindness,  how  treated  by 
Zuni 57 

SOAPWEED — 

fiber  of,  used  for  cords,  mats, 

etc 79 

used  as  food 73 

used  for  decorating  pottery ...        82 

used  for  washing 83, 90 

used  in  ceremonies 90 

SoKORiKo      Indians,      modeling 

among 140 

Solicitation,  signs  of 201 

Song  used  in  ceremony 43, 55 

Son-in-law,  The  contented,  leg- 
end        190 

Sophia,  clan  name  from 86 

Sorcery,  medicine  practised  by.        40 

Sound,  spirits  known  by 170, 176 

South  Carolina — 

archives  of 18 

researches  in 11 

Southern  Cross,  l^ends  concern- 
ing       261 

Spaniards  invade  Zuni 35 

Speaking,  objection  to 240,  241 

Spectacle-pod,  use  of,  in  medi- 
cine         48 

Speech      impairment,      in   ven- 
geance   359-360 

Spider-webs,  legends  concerning .     212, 

342 

Spindle,  form  of 77 

Spirit-house,    incantations    per- 
formed in 334,  335 

Spirit  road,  recognition  of 126, 177 

Spirits,  anthropomorphic,  beliefs 

concerning 149, 161-163 

Spirits  op  the  body — 

abiding  place 266 

cult 137-140 

exorcism 149, 163-164, 168 

fear  of 155-156, 159-160, 182, 197 

future  life 160-163, 175,  266 

goodness  or  badness 149, 162-163 


Spirits  op  the  body — Continued.     Page 

immortality 149,154 

invocation 167-168, 192 

nature 149, 152-154 

propitiation.  149, 155-156,163-164,270 

recognition 176-177 

referring  to 239-240,263 

remaining  of,  in  grave 149 

transformation  of 158, 175 

Spittle — 

spirit  in 152, 182 

used  in  medicine 62,  63 

Spruce-tree  House — 

collection  from 22 

repair  of 20 

Spurge — 

origin  of  name 51 

used  for  sweetening 67-68 

used  in  medicine 51 

Squash — 

blossoms,  error  regarding 46 

used  as  food 66-67 

used  in  ceremonies 88 

used  in  medicine 45-46,  50,  62 

Stahl, ,  cited 42 

Standley,     p.    C,     acknowledg- 
ments to 38 

Stab  people,  plants  derived  from .        36 

Stars — 

legends  of 260, 261-265 

names  of 260-265 

spittle  and  urine  of 260 

Stealing,  punishment  for 183, 205 

Stedman,  J.  G.  (St),  cited 157, 

159, 229,  328 

Steele,  E.  S.,  acknowledgments 
to 38 

Stepping  over  a  man,  objections 
to 239,271 

Stevenson,  James — 

cited 37 

visits  Zuni. 35 

Stevenson,  Matilda  C,  work  of.  10, 15, 

25, 31-102 
work  of I0jl5 

Stick-leai' — 

folk-lore  concerning 84-85 

used  in  medicine 56 

Sting-bay,  used  for  toothache 371 

Stinking  bird.    See  Bunla. 

Stoerck,  Baron — 

cited 63 

Datura  introduced  by 41 


INDEX 


449 


Page 

Stomach,  how  treated 44, 45,  56,  60 

Stone.    See  Rock. 

Stone  axes — 

explained  as  thunderbolts 270 

search  for 220-223 

source 219,223,237,363 

Stones,  green — 

barter  in 210, 290-291, 365 

description 291 

talismans 290-291,  332 

Storms,  rousing  of 267 

Strainers,  blue  grama  used  for. . .        83 

Stramonium.    See  Datura. 

Strangulation,   how  treated  by 

Zuni 52 

Suds,  plant  from  which  made 93 

Suicide,  occurrence  of 227 

Sumac — 

used  for  basketry 81 

used  in  ceremonies 97 

Sun — ■ 

eclipses 254-256 

greeting  to 254 

legends 130-136 

origin 255-256 

spirit 254-256 

See  also  Sun  Father. 

Sunburn,  how  prevented  by  Zuni.        50 

Sun  Father — 

mentioned  in  prayer 37 

shrine  of  the 35 

See  also  Sun. 

Sunflower — 

used  in  ceremonies 93 

used  in  medicine 53 

Sunshine,  signs  of 269 

Supreme  Being — 

belief  in 117-119 

name  for 117,118,130 

Surinam — 

courtship  in 313 

investigation  in 107 

Susquehanna  Bivbr,  early  tribes 
of 20 

SWANTON,  Dr.  J.  R. — 

bulletin  by 23 

work  of 10,15,18,22 

SwEAT-BATH,  used  by  Zuni 42, 53,  61 

Swellings,  how  treated  by  Zuni. .       49, 
50,  53,  54, 55,  56 
15961° — 30  ETH.— 15 29 


SwORD     SwALLOWERS'     FRATERNI- 
TY— 

account 38 

medical  practice  of 59 

Symbolism — 

of  cardinal  points 46 

of  color 64 

of  vegetation 36 

Syphilis,  how  treated 44, 49, 57, 60 

Taboos.  See  under  Animals; 
Food;  Mother-in-law;  Rat- 
tle; Snake  poison;  Totem 
animal;  Water;  Women. 

Talismans,  nature  of 288-291 

Talkativeness — 

medicine  to  induce 91 

punishment  for 198, 204, 209, 251 

Tamales,  use  of  mush  in 76 

Tamanac  Indians — 

belief  in  God 118,136 

legends 145, 149-150 

Tapir— 

characteristics 367-368 

charms  made  from 368 

legends 134-135, 

226, 227, 245, 260, 265, 294 

origin 227 

Tapuyo  Indians,  propitiation  by.  329 
Tabiana  Indians,  burial  customs.  158 
Teamster's  tea — 

beverage  made  of 67 

used  in  medicine 49 

Teeth,  injured  by  certain  seeds. . .      330 

Texas,  researches  in 11, 18 

Thief,    detected    by    ceremonial 

procedure 89-91 

Thistle  ,  used  in  medicine 44 

Thomas,  Dr.  Cyrus — 

buUetinby 23 

work  of 10,17,19 

Thorn-apple,  used  in  ceremonies.  88-91 

Throat,  how  treated  by  Zuni 49, 

53, 56, 59, 60 

Thunder,  sources  of 269-270 

Tlahuanaco,  collection  from 22 

Tidal  wave,  cause  of 241,251 

Tiger-bead    necklace,    descrip- 
tion..       224 


450 


INDEX 


Tigers — 

characterietics 367 

legends 123,133-134, 

178, 202-204, 205-206, 210-211, 216- 
217,  218-219,  223-225,  342,  373-375 

man  created  from 143 

markings  on,  origin 224 

teeth  of,  talismans 289 

JSeealso  Black  Tiger;  Warea- 
CABA  tiger. 
TiGTiTiG  bird.    See  Tikitiki. 

TiKITIKI  BIRD — • 

damage  to  children  by 187, 371 

preying  of,  on  spirits  of  dead.  161-162 

TiMBHRi  (Ti),  cited. . . .  140, 255, 296, 304, 

319, 323, 324, 331, 333, 340, 345, 352 

Timidity,  cure  for 85 

TiTTONi,  ToMMASO,  dedication  to.       105 

Tlingit,  references  to 19 

Toads — 

worship  of 138-139 

See  also  Frogs. 
Tobacco — 

clan  name  from 86 

juice  of,  medicine  power  from.      328 

legend  of  Mawdri  and 192 

occlusion  of  vision  \>y 298-299 

origin 246,334-338 

used  in  medicine 54 

used  in  ordeals 338-340 

used  to  invoke  spirits 95,191-192 

Toilet,  plants  used  for ;  83, 88 

ToKOROi-MO,  evil  due  to 349 

TOMATILLA — 

used  as  food 68 

used  in  ceremonies 94 

Tongue,   sore,   how    treated    by 

Zuni 50 

Toothache,  cure  for 52, 60, 371 

Torrents,  tears  of  spirits 236 

Tortillas,  preparation  of 71 

Tortoise,  characteristics 369 

Totem  animal,  taboo  against  kill- 
ing   297 

Toupinambou  Indians,  legends. . .  363 

TouviNGA  NEGROES,  description..  364 
To'wA  yal'lannb — ■■ 

legend 35 

Traditions,   preserved  by  medi- 
cine-men   345 

Transformation  of  body. 149, 

150-151, 182, 184, 199, 341 

legends  concerning 184-185 

moon  and,  relation  of 257 


Page 

Tree  op  Life,  spirits  asscciated 
with 228,229,233 

Trees — 

origin  of  man  from 144-145j  146 

spirits  associated  with. .  171-172, 228 

Tribe  op  the  Pork,  study  of  his- 
tory of 19,20 

Trio  Indians — 

beliefs 363 

food.. 296,297 

legend  of,  on  creation 145 

names 304 

ordeals 278 

talismans 288 

True,  Z)r.  R.  H.,  acknowledgments 

to 38 

Trumpet,  used  in  ceremonies 137 

Trumpeter  bird — 

plumage  of ,  origin 212 

warnings  by 275-276 

Tsi'nahe,  acknowledgments  to 38 

TucAno  Indians — 

burial  customs  of 158 

names  of , 306 

Tukuyuha,  description  of 171, 366 

TuMBLEWEED  eaten  by  Zufii 65 

Tunica — 

linguistic  material  of 19 

research  among  the 18 

Tupi  Indians,  belief  in  God 
among 118-119 

Turkeys,  how  fed  by  Zufii 59 

Turner,  Dr.,  cited 48 

Turquoise  used  in  medicine 50 

Turtles — 

amuletfrom 213 

legends 212- 

213, 223-225,  226-227, 272 

markings  on,  origin 224 

used  as  food 297-298 

TuRU  FRUIT,  ripening  of,  festival 
at 138 

TuscARORA,  study  of  language  of..        20 

Tuyuka  Indians,,  natal  customs. .      322 

Twins — 

cause 320 

consequences 320, 325 

Two  -  fingered  Negroes.  See 
Touvinga. 

Uacarra  Indians,  marriage  cus- 
toms of 314r-315 

Uamma  (snake),  Caribs  descended 
from 143-144 


INDEX 


,451 


Page 

Uaupes  River  Indians — 

binas  of 284-285 

eclipses  among 258-259 

festivals 138, 139 

food  laws. : 297 

medicine-men. 341 

natal  customs 322 

puberty 311 

resemblance  to  women 365 

•     storms 269-270 

talismans 291 

Urine,  retention  of,  cure  for 53, 371 

Vampire — 

description  of 192 

legend 221 

Vaughan,  Dr.    G.    T.,    acknowl- 
edgments to 38 

Vegetable  dyes,  sources 80, 83 

Venezuela,  investigation  in. 107 

Vengeance — 

agent , 357-361 

agent  of,  purification 360-361 

discovery  of  object  of 356-357 

execution  of 358-361 

incarnation  of 354-355 

laws  of 354,357-361 

See  also  Kanaima. 
Vernatti,  Sir  Philberto,  cited..        41 

VicTORT,  augury  of 271-272 

Virtue,  conception  of. .  149-161, 162-163 
Vision — 

association  of,  with  wishing  . .       301 

restrictions  on 292,  298-302, 311 

See  also  Eyes. 

Visitors,  omen  of 271, 275-277 

Vomiting,  induced,  practice  of 53, 

63, 295,  351 
VondbnStbinen  (VDS),  cited.  149,225 

Von  Martius  , ,  cited 290 , 

362, 368 
Vulture — 

legends  concerning 206- 

208, 212,  343-345,  371 
spirit  incarnated  ia 175 

Wallace,  A.  R.  (ARW)— 

cited 118, 

139, 157, 258, 270,  291, 295, 297, 311, 
315, 320, 322,  325, 341,  367,  368, 369 

on  Amazons 365 

on  Jurupari. music 138 


'  Page 

Walther,  Henry,  work  of 23 

Wapisiana  Indians — 

belief  as  to  idiocy 166 

beliefs  as  to  spirits 172, 174 

couvade 322 

customs 254, 322 

food 296 

War,  declaration 362 

War  Gods,  ZuSi — 

medicines  of 39 

shrine  of  the 35 

snakeweed  named  by 53 

Warracaba  tigers,  description..      367 

Warrau  Indians — 

abbreviation  for  name 107 

amativenesH,  expression 164 

anger  among,  sign 300-301 

beUefs ,. . .  118, 119, 120, 160 

binas i 284, 285, 286 

burial  customs 156, 157, 160, 287 

couvade 322 

exorcism 196-197 

food 352 

legends 122- 

133, 142-144, 150-151, 166, 172- 
173, 174, 177-178, 180, 182-184, 
190-191, 193, 195, 199-203, 205- 
208, 210-211, 213-218, 223-227, 
244-245, 247, 249-251, 255-256, 
263-267, 271-273, 286, 292-293, 
302-303,  334-336,  342,  380-382 

marriage  customs 319 

medicine-men 342 

menstruation 309 

names 307 

natal  customs 320,322 

ordeals 309, 310, 339 

origin  of  man 142, 143-144 

propitiation  by 230, 299 

puberty 309, 311, 312 

quarrel  with  Water  Spirits 241 

use  of  boats ' 125 

vengeance 355, 357 

words  taboo 252 

Washing,  soapweed  used  for 83 

Washington,  researches  in 11, 15 

Wasp  eggs  ,  binas  from 288 

Wasps — 

dogs  named  after 307 

legends 334, 336-337 

used  in  ordeals 309-310 

Wassi,  poison  of 358-359 


452 


INDEX 


Page 

Water — 

effect  of ,  on  bees 201 

splashing  a  man  with,  meaning 

of 201 

traveling  on,  words  taboo  while    252- 
253, 307 

Water  babies,  belief  in 247 

Watbr-cow.    See  Manati. 

Water  jug,  transformation  of 246 

Water  parsnip — 

place  named  for 86 

used  in  medicine 44 

Water  people — 

legends  concerning 242-243 

See  also  Fish  nation. 

Water  snake — 

legend  concerning 225, 242 

See  also  Camudi. 

Water  Spirits — 

account 241-253 

amorousness 241,246-249 

beliefs  in 154, 241-253 

cohabitation  with 325 

descriptions 241-245 

gift  of  stones  by 330 

helpfulness 241,245-246 

offense  to 251-253 

origin 241, 245 

references  to 241, 251-252 

See  also  Fish-mamma;  Fish 
nation;  Okoyumo;  Omar; 
ORiru. 

Watehton,  C.  (W) — 

cited 328, 343 

on  making  curare 303-304 

on  spirit  incarnation 175 

Watt-uta.      See    Frogs;     Bain- 

PROGS. 

Weapons,  burial  of,  with  dead 149, 

156-157 

Weather — 

control  of 267-268, 270 

forecasting  of 269 

See  also  Kain. 

Weaving,  plants  used  in 77-79 

Wheat — 

preparation  of 71 

use  of ,  in  he'palokla 75 

Whipping — 

as  ordeal 808, 311, 821 

broken  arrow  used  for 210 

datil  used  for 99 

in  ceremonies 138,157,300 


Page 

Whips,  invention 228 

White   men,   rainbow    associated 

with 268 

Whooping  cough,  origin  of 293 

Wicissi-DUCK,  origin  of 122 

Widows,  marriage  of 314 

Wild  Four-o'clock,  used  in  medi- 
cine   58 

WlLLQW— 

used  as  medicine 42 

used  for  basketry 81 

used  for  toaisting-forks 70 

WiLBON,    T.,    objects    purchased 

from 22 

Windows  of  Zuni 36 

Winged  pigweed,  used  to  confuse 

enemy 84 

Winnebago,  manuscript  on  the...        24 
Winter  sage,  used  in  medicine. . .        51 
Wishing,  association  of,  with  vis- 
ion   135,  SOI 

Witchcraft — 

bones  used  in '. 149, 159 

punishment 39, 40, 41, 853 

See  also  Kanaima. 
Wives — 

bringing  up  of 182 

buried  with  husbands 149, 157 

redress  of 207 

warning  to,  legend 816-818 

Women — ■ 

and  the  serpent  Oroli,  legend . .      378 

buried  with  husbands 149, 157 

chastity  of 44,160 

creator  of 126 

exclusion  of,  from  hunting. .  194, 226 
from  sacred  instruments .  138, 229 

forbidden  to  handle  binas 282 

game  brought  home  by 294 

obstinacy  of,  legend 272-273 

restrictions  on.  See  Child- 
birth; Menstruation; 
Pregnancy. 

taboos  of 303, 304, 319 

transformation  of,  legend 172-173 

Wood,  Dr.  George  B.,  cited 62 

WooD-ANTS,  legend  concerning 211 

Woodpecker — 

legend  concerning 211 

nest  of,  shooting  into 315-316 

Words,  paraphraeis  of,  in  boats. .  252-253 
Worms,  origin  of  Caribs  from 143 


INDEX 


453 


Wormwood — 

eaten  by  Zufii 

used  for  colds 

Wounds,  how  treated  by  Zufii. 


Page 

65 

42 

41-43, 


WXJRALI  POISON. 


47, 49, 52, 63 
See  Curare. 


XimAna  Indians,  natal  customs. .      325 

Yahuna  Indians,  legends  of 146, 229 

Yaperi-kuli,  identification  of 120 

See  also  Haburi. 
Yar.    See  Sun. 

Yarrow,  used  in  medicine 42 

Yaruro,  ordeals  among 278 

Yawahus — 

babies  brought  by 187, 343 

description 171-172 

l^ends. . . .  121, 187, 191, 195,  222, 230 

protection  against 299 

Yawning,  beliefs  cohceming 271 

Yellow  dyes,  sources  of 80,  97 

Yellow  flax,  used  in  medicine. ..        56 
Yellow  pine,  used  in  ceremonies. .        96 
Yucca.    See  Dattl;  Soapweed. 
Yurokon — 

beliefs  concerning 165, 171, 179 

description 174 

distribution  of  name 170 


Yurokon — Continued.  page 

legends 179, 181, 192, 195,  231 

See  also  Jurupari. 

Zabang,  Mount,  heaven  on 136 

Zaparo  Indians — 

food 297 

natal  customs 325 

Zemi.    See  Cemi. 

Zinnia,  used  in  medicine 45 

ZuSi  Indians — 

ethnobotany 25, 31-102 

general  sketch 35-38 

medical  practice 39 

plants  of — 

ceremonial  uses 87-100 

edible 65-76 

indexlLst 101-102 

medicinal 39-64 

names  derived  from 86 

used  in  basketry 81 

used  in  dyeing 80 

used  in  folk-lore 84r-85 

used   in   pottery   decora- 
tion         82 

usedintoilet 83 

used  in  weaving 77 

researches  among 16 

Zuni   Nick,    acknowledgments  to        38 
Zurina  Indians,  carving  by 140 


