https://tiboko.com/wp-content/uploads/2023/07/Final-version-GvB-Papiamentu-book.pdf
→ https://tiboko.com/wp-content/uploads/2023/07/Final-version-GvB-Papiamentu-book.pdf
Content-Type: application/pdf

See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at:
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/275519244
Caquetío Indians on Curaçao during
colonial times and Caquetío words in the
Papiamentu Language
RESEARCH · APRIL 2015
DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.1.3883.6649
READS
117
1 AUTHOR:
Gerard van Buurt
25 PUBLICATIONS 262 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE
Available from: Gerard van Buurt
Retrieved on: 04 March 2016
1
Caquetío Indians on Curaçao during colonial times 
and Caquetío words in the Papiamentu language 
Some names of Animals and Plants 
in Papiamentu
Gerard van Buurt
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 1 9/8/2014 5:11:40 PM
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 2 9/8/2014 5:11:40 PM
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 3 9/8/2014 5:11:40 PM
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 4 9/8/2014 5:11:40 PM
Caquetío Indians on Curaçao during colonial times 
and Caquetío words in the Papiamentu language 
Some names of Animals and Plants 
in Papiamentu
Gerard van Buurt
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 5 9/8/2014 5:11:40 PM
Published by:
This publication was supported by a grant of: 
Prins Bernhard Cultuurfonds Caribisch Gebied. 
Design and lay-out: 
Michelle da Costa Gomez for Curassavica N.V.
Printer: 
Penta Educatief BV
First Edition 2014
© 2014 drs. Gerard van Buurt
ISBN 978-99904-2-348-8
All rights reserved. No part from this book may be reproduced in any form by 
print, photoprint, microfilm or any other means without the permission of the 
author.
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 6 9/8/2014 5:11:40 PM
In memory of my grandmother, 
Hendrika Joubert - Pinto
July 17, 1890 - March 17, 1963
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 7 9/8/2014 5:11:44 PM
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 8 9/8/2014 5:11:44 PM
9
Preface
 In this book two articles which were published previously by FPI and 
UNA are reissued with many illustrations and with two maps added. The list of 
references for each article has been combined into one listing. The 2009 article 
on the Caquetío Indians has been revised somewhat, there are some additions; 
it is thus not identical to the previous version. The 2012 article also has some 
new entries and additional information was added to some of the entries. The 
references to the original articles are:
van Buurt G., 2009. Caquetío Indians on Curaçao during colonial times and Caquetío 
 words in the Papiamentu language. In: Leeward voices; Fresh perspectives on 
 Papiamentu and the Literatures and Cultures of the ABC islands. Nicholas Faraclas, 
 Ronald Severing, Christa Weijer & Liesbeth Echteld (Eds.) Proceedings of the 
 ECICC- conference, Curaçao, 2008, Volume I, pp. 57- 82. FPI/UNA Curaçao.
van Buurt G., 2012. Some names of Animals and plants in Papiamentu. In: Multiplex 
 Cultures and citizenships, Multiple Perspectives on Language, Literature, 
 Education, and Society in the ABC- Islands and beyond. Nicholas Faraclas, Ronald 
 Severing, Christa Weijer & Liesbeth Echteld (Eds.) Proceedings of the ECICC-
 conference, Guyana (in error; should be Grenada) 2011, Volume I, pp. 193-215, 
 FPI/UNA, Curaçao/Puerto Rico.
Aruba (A) uses a different spelling of Papiamento / Papiamentu than Curaçao 
(C) and Bonaire (B). In the past many different spellings were used; individual 
persons would write differently in accordance to their linguistic background. 
Also during different periods of time different influences would predominate. 
Sometimes the spelling would be more influenced by Dutch while in other 
times the Spanish influence increased. Other languages would have some 
influence as well. The Aruba spelling is based on a more or less etymological 
rendering of the spelling according to the language of origin; while the 
Curaçao/Bonaire spelling is based on a more phonetic, phonological or 
phonemical (according to what you hear) background. 
Standardized word lists have now been made for both the Aruba and the 
Curaçao/Bonaire spellings and have been published. For Aruba we have the 
“Vocabulario Ortografico di Papiamento (VOP)” and for Curaçao and Bonaire 
the ”Ortografia i lista di palabra Papiamentu (Buki di Oro)”. Both were 
published in 2009. The VOP had an earlier edition in 2007. Although these 
lists are still incomplete, they can nevertheless also be used as a guideline 
to deduce the spelling of other words which have not yet been included. 
In addition to the official spellings which are nowadays in use, many other 
spellings can be found in older works and historical documents. It is important 
to give an overview of such earlier spellings as well, since they give some 
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 9 9/8/2014 5:11:44 PM
10
idea of the evolution of the language. In this work the official spelling for 
either Aruba or for Curaçao and Bonaire is mentioned first, followed by other 
versions found in the past. Often there is no difference and for words which 
are in use on all three islands and for which there is no difference in spelling 
no separate specification is given. Sometimes a word is in use on one or two 
of the island(s) only and in such a case the spelling given is the one in use on 
that island. For example the lizard “Koffie ku lechi” [Kòfi ku lechi] is only 
found on Aruba and thus only the Aruban spelling is given. The anolis lizard 
Anolis lineatus is found in both Aruba and Curaçao. In Aruba it is called 
“Waltaca”, this name is in use only in Aruba and is thus given in the Aruban 
spelling; in the Curaçao/Bonaire spelling it would be written “Waltaka”. While 
the Curaçao/ Bonaire spelling uses diacritics (to modify sounds: è, ò, ù, ü) 
and accents (to emphasize vowels: á, é, í, ó, ú), the Aruba spelling does not 
use them. In this case it is assumed that a native speaker does not need them 
and that they are thus superfluous. This can however be problematical for an 
outsider. Also sometimes there is a different pronunciation on the islands. 
The flamingo is called “Chogogo” on all three islands but on Aruba it is 
pronounced “Chògògò”. In the official Aruban spelling no accents or diacritics 
are used and it is written Chogogo just like in the other islands. Thus for Aruba 
the word has been bracketed [Chògògò] to indicate the different pronunciation. 
This has also been done for other words in Aruba, where the accents are not 
written.
Pictures by the author except where otherwise noted,
 The author, Gerard van Buurt
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 10 9/8/2014 5:11:44 PM
11
Foreword
This superbly researched book represents a welcome and ground-breaking 
contribution, not only to our knowledge about the flora and fauna of Curaçao 
and the rest of the former Dutch Leeward Islands, but also about the presence 
of indigenous peoples such as the Caquetío on these and other islands after 
colonization and the significant role that they played in forging the creolized 
languages and cultures of the colonial Caribbean. This work includes a substantial inventory of terms referring to the animal and plant life of Curaçao. 
Fascinating and richly nuanced descriptions are supplied for each term, and 
many are illustrated by breathtakingly beautiful photographs. Drs. Gerard van 
Buurt’s careful and detailed focus on the natural history of Curaçao is matched 
by his comprehensive and encyclopedic knowledge of the island’s social history. This rare and uniquely effective combination of approaches yields important insights into the actual words and practices of the people of present day 
Curaçao, some of which can be traced back to indigenous languages and ways 
of life. Significant light is also shed on the manner in which the Caquetío and 
other indigenous peoples of the insular Caribbean managed to integrate their 
linguistic and cultural heritage into what have become the creolized languages 
and cultures of the region, despite enslavement, disease, and deportation. This 
book thus contributes to a growing body of scholarly research that is gradually 
challenging and dispelling the myth of the complete disappearance of indigenous peoples from Curaçao and most of the other Caribbean islands and to the 
increasing body of evidence of their dynamic agency within the socio-cultural 
matrix from which Papiamentu and the other Creole languages of the Caribbean emerged. 
Prof. Dr. Nicholas Faraclas
University of Puerto Rico, Río Piedras
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 11 9/8/2014 5:11:44 PM
12
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 12 9/8/2014 5:11:44 PM
Caquetío Indians on Curaçao during colonial times 
and Caquetío words in the Papiamentu language 
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 13 9/8/2014 5:11:44 PM
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 14 9/8/2014 5:11:44 PM
15
1. Introduction
The Dutch deportation of Curaçao Caquetío Indians to Venezuela in 1634 
is often interpreted as having ended the Indigenous presence on Curaçao. 
While this diminished the Caquetío presence on the island, some Indigenous 
people always remained. The first slaves, freed slaves, and some Europeans 
as well, were in contact with the Caquetío. Thus, even though there were 
not many Indians, they were definitely present and part of the substratum 
when Papiamentu was formed. These Indians were in contact with Aruba and 
Venezuela, which they could more easily reach than Bonaire. A small Indian 
village in western Curaçao still existed in 1677 and probably lasted until the 
early 18th century. In Aruba and Bonaire the Caquetío remained. Thus some 
original Caquetío words can be found in Papiamentu. These are mostly names 
of local plants and animals and toponyms. The frequent use of the /Σ/ ‘shi’ 
sound could also be a Caquetío influence in Papiamentu.
2. The arrival of man in Curaçao, Archaic Age Indians and 
Caquetío
2800 years BC there were already Indians living on Curaçao, whom we 
nowadays refer to as the Archaic Age Indians. Later, probably around 500 
AD, the Caquetío tribe, a group of Indians belonging to the Maipure-Arawak 
tribes in Venezuela arrived. The name Caquetío may be related to the name 
of the Caquetá river in South-Eastern Colombia and the Caquetío tribe may 
have originated somewhere in this area. It is not known what happened to 
the Archaic Age Indians. A few Archaic Age Indian sites have been found 
in Curaçao, some of them dating to about 2500 BC. Recent archaeological 
investigations during 2008 and 2009 (Hoogland and Hofman, 2011) at Sta. 
Barbara, along the eastern coast of the Spaanse Water inner bay, have indicated 
that this site was visited and temporarily occupied during several periods 
spanning a long period of time. The oldest radiocarbon dates for this site go 
back to about 2800 BC and are associated with the Archaic Age Indians. It 
is not clear whether the remains dated to around 500 AD. represent a late 
Archaic or early Ceramic stage and/or whether they are early Caquetío. The 
site was still being used around AD 1600, by indigenous people, presumably 
•
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 15 9/8/2014 5:11:44 PM
16
the Caquetío. There is a gap of about 1500 years, from about 1000 BC to 500 
AD. Up to now no sites with remains of Indian settlements that can be assigned 
to this interval have been found in Curaçao. The Caquetío lived in the present 
Venezuelan states of Lara and Falcón and in Aruba (A), Curaçao (C) and 
Bonaire (B). There were also some Caquetío villages on the western coast of 
the Gulf of Venezuela and Lake Maracaibo, on the La Guajira Peninsula, as 
well as south-east of Maracaibo (Oliver, 1989).
3. Contacts between Curaçao, Aruba, Bonaire and Venezuela
The Caquetío Indians on Curaçao could cross to and from Venezuela and 
Aruba quite easily, which they certainly did regularly. Traveling by canoe, it 
is much more difficult to reach Bonaire from Curaçao then to reach Aruba or 
Venezuela which are further away. 
To go to Aruba in a canoe would be relatively easy since one would travel with 
the current. To get back from Aruba, one would have to cross to Venezuela, 
which is not difficult since one would be able to move across the current. 
Along the Venezuelan coast there is often a countercurrent. In his book Aquella 
Paraguaná, Alí Brett Martinez describes how salted fish was transported 
from Punto Fijo to Coro by hugging the coast of Paraguaná and picking up 
this countercurrent. Indians coming from Aruba and going to Curaçao could 
take advantage of this countercurrent and travel east to Puerto Cumarebo, and 
then cross back to Curaçao across the main current. They would leave from a 
site somewhat to the east of Puerto Cumarebo formerly called “Puerto de Los 
Curaçao” i.e., where “Los Curaçao”, meaning the Curaçao Indians, would 
cross over to Curaçao. From this point the crossover is made easily. Thus 
getting back to Curaçao from Aruba could probably have been accomplished in 
less than a week’s time, assuming favorable weather conditions and a few days 
of rest along the Venezuelan coast.
La Guajira Peninsula was also within range. It could be reached travelling with 
the current and coming back by a more southerly route toward Punto Fijo, 
through calmer waters. From there one would travel along the coast toward the 
east and “Puerto de Los Curaçao”. The Relación de Antonio Barbudo, which 
probably dates from 1570, states the following: “De la parte de Poniente deste 
Golfo (de Venezuela) están las sierras Coquibacoa Alta y por la noticia que 
tengo de los indios de Curaçao, es tierra bien poblada.” [On the western side 
of this gulf (the Venezuelan gulf) lie the mountains of Coquibacoa Alta [these 
are in La Guajira], and from what the Curaçao Indians told me this is a well 
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 16 9/8/2014 5:11:44 PM
17
populated area]. This implies that the Indigenous people on Curaçao knew the 
Guajira Peninsula well. 
Getting to Bonaire from the mainland would probably have been much more 
difficult. One would have to follow the Venezuelan coast all the way to the 
mouth of the Tocuyo River, or even further east, then cross over from there. 
Maybe it would have been possible to make the crossing from Curaçao to 
Bonaire directly during very calm days, which tend to occur in September or 
October. Using canoes, both Aruba and Venezuela could thus be reached more 
easily than Bonaire. According to archaeologist Jay Haviser, the Indigenous 
pottery in Bonaire is more similar to the pottery of the Aroa area on the 
Venezuelan mainland, while Curaçaoan pottery is of the Dabajuro type which 
is found on Aruba. This evidence supports the theory outlined above that 
contact between Curacao, Venezuela and Aruba was much more frequent than 
contact between Curaçao and Bonaire.
The availability of high protein sea-food must have been an important factor 
that motivated Indigenous people to visit and settle on the islands. In Curaçao 
for example the main Indigenous settlements were situated along the inner 
bays, and fish and shellfish constituted an important part of the diet. There 
probably existed some trade with the mainland in sea-food items that could 
be transported live, such as conch (Strombus gigas), West-Indian Top shell 
(Cittarium pica) and sea turtles. A few Cerion uva land snails, a species which 
is only found on Aruba, Curaçao and Bonaire were encountered in Indian shell 
middens near the Lago de Valencia in Venezuela; these could only have come 
from these islands (Berry, 1934). During several archaeological excavations 
in Curaçao, Aruba and Bonaire of Caquetío settlements, remains of animals 
from the South-American mainland were found (Haviser, 1994; Hooijer, 1960 
and 1963; Versteeg & Rostain, 1997). Some of these were probably kept as 
pets. Stone axes and other implements made of rock material that does not 
occur on these islands were also found. All of this indicates that contacts with 
the mainland were probably quite regular and very likely extended well into 
colonial times. It is also likely that some of the deported Indians filtered back 
to the island during the years after their deportation, especially after the peace 
of Westphalia (Münster) between the Dutch Republic and Spain had been 
concluded in 1648.
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 17 9/8/2014 5:11:44 PM
18
Fig. 1 - Sea travel by Caquetío Indians and prevailing currents.
A little bay east of Puerto Cumarebo was named “Puerto de los Indios Curaçao” and it 
is known that the Caquetío Indians of Curaçao set out from here to travel to Curaçao 
in their canoes (Hartog, 1968). Depending on the weather the Tafelberg in Curaçao is 
either already visible from here with very clear weather, or will come into view early 
during the trip if visibility is somewhat less. Aiming for the Tafelberg one would 
travel across the current and will drift somewhat to the West, where the harbor named 
Careatabo would be a logical place of arrival. There was also a well near this location. 
From here the voyage can also be made in the reverse direction, while compensating 
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 18 9/8/2014 5:11:45 PM
19
for the strength of the current. Careatabo, 
Careotabo, Cariatávo (different spellings 
exist) was situated at an old lagoon where 
nowadays the Breezes hotel and Mambo 
beach are found. From here following the 
coast, Maniguacoa, the present Piscaderabay 
beach can be reached easily going with the 
current. From here travel routes become a 
bit more hypothetical, no historical records 
describing them exist, but if one wanted to 
go to Aruba, this seems to be a logical place 
from which to depart. With clear weather 
the Cerro de Santa Ana in Paraguaná (844 
m) can be seen from Maniguacoa. One 
could aim for this hill, and traveling in a 
Southwesterly direction, the current will then 
gradually set the canoe more Westward, and 
this will enable one to reach the South coast 
of Aruba. If one were to leave from a point 
Westward of Maniguacoa, which would 
be nearer to Aruba, then one would run the 
risk of being swept North of Aruba by the 
current, drifting in a WNW direction from 
which it would be very difficult to reach 
land. Thus by departing from Maniguacoa 
this risk is minimized. It may be that 
both Careatabo and Maniguacoa were the 
important points for travel to and from 
the mainland and to Aruba and this could 
explain why these names are mentioned 
in the historical records. The city of Coro 
was founded by the Spanish in 1527 and 
during Spanish colonial times this was 
also an important destination, which could 
be reached quite easily. From Aruba to 
Paraguaná one can travel across the current 
and it is known that during the 18th and early 19th century the Aruba Indians went to 
the village of Santa Ana, quite regularly, to fetch a priest and bring him to Aruba to 
baptize children and conduct marriages (Nooyen, 1979). Along the Venezuelan coast 
there is often a counter-current which can be used to travel in an easterly direction. 
The village of Santa Ana is situated inland just south of the Cerro de Santa Ana. The 
Aruba Indians had their canoes in the Bubali area and probably departed from there. 
On the map Klein Curaçao is indicated as Nicula. Bonaire is indicated as Buinare. 
Although it has also been named in historical records as Boynaj, Buynari, Buynare, 
I prefer to use the name Buinare since this name seems to be more in harmony with 
other Caquetío toponyms. Admittedly this is a subjective judgment.
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 19 9/8/2014 5:11:45 PM
20
4. Caquetío Indians during colonial times
The Spanish arrived on Curaçao in1499. Between 1515 and 1526, the Spanish 
raided the island several times for slaves and a large number of Indians were 
carried off to Hispaniola (Haviser, 1987). In 1634, the Dutch conquered the 
island and all the Spaniards and most of the Indigenous population were 
deported to the Venezuelan coast, near Coro. This event is often interpreted as 
having ended the Indigenous presence on Curaçao, but some Indians remained.
After the Dutch deportations, there were still three Indigenous villages on 
the island and some Indigenous people were living at other locations as well. 
In the eastern part of Curaçao, there was a village called Rancho Indian near 
Brievengat and some Indigenous people were living in the Rooi Catootje 
area. In the western part of Curaçao (Banda Abou) there were two villages; 
Codoko, near Bartoolbaai, and another one near Seru Bientu. This last village 
was called “Pueblo Nuevo de la Asunción” or is sometimes referred to as 
“Pueblo de la Ascención Nueva” (Nooyen, 1979), and was situated near San 
Fig. 2 - On this map (map of Werbata, 1911) the location of the village “Pueblo Nuevo de la 
Asunción” or “Pueblo de la Ascención Nueva” (Nooyen, 1979), is indicated as Site C-60 (see 
Haviser,1987). 
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 20 9/8/2014 5:11:47 PM
21
Hieronymus hill, toward Seru Bientu and Christoffelberg (Haviser, 1987), 
where Indian pottery is found together with colonial artifacts, such as Gouda 
smoking pipes and shards of Delft pottery. This village dates from the Spanish 
period (Haviser, 1987). Haviser has named the site C-60 (See Fig 2), new 
archaeological excavations are now being conducted at this site. According to 
Hartog (1968), the Dutch did not deport all the Indigenous people, some were 
allowed to live at Ascención. Hartog does not mention the other two other 
villages listed above. Reference to the “new” village is found in a baptism 
record from 1677, when it still existed (Nooyen, 1979), and it may have lasted 
well into the early 18th century. 
In 1705 Father Michael J.A. Schabel, S.J. a Catholic priest, wrote a report 
of his stay in Curaçao and visit to Bonaire and Aruba (in 1704/05). In this 
“Notitia” of 1705 Schabel says about the Curaçao Indians, on page 112 of the 
manuscript:
“Redeo ad indos cacathios in ista Insula Coraçao degentes. Antes annos 
sex me jam noverunt indi isti: dum nimirum per hanc Insulam transivi. 
Baptizavi enim in transit ille parvulos et indulos eorum complures. Hujus 
rei causa fuit meus ille Caziquius et princeps indicus mihi postea Bruxellis 
in Brabantia defunctus. Hic enim etiam ex illius Magni Manaure (: 
Caziquij et Regis indici:) ab nepotibus et posteris erat lingue et natione 
cacathius. Cumque ut idiomate sic stirpe et sanguine junctus videretur 
indis istis hujus Insulae, illis charissimus et gratissimus erat omnia apud 
ipsos poterat.” 
[I am returning to the Caquetío Indians who live on this island of Curaçao. 
Six years ago these Indians already knew me; when I passed through 
this island. During this transit I baptized several of their small Indian 
children. This was possible through (caused by) the Caçique or Indian 
prince who travelled with me and who later died in Brussels in Brabant. 
He was indeed one of them and a descendant of the Great Manaure (: The 
Caçique and Indian King:) and related to them by Caquetío language and 
nationality. And because he had a bond with the Indians of this Island, 
through language, descent and blood, he was well received by them and 
could get anything done.]
Here Schabel refers to a visit he made to Curaçao “six years earlier” (in 1698) 
when he was travelling to Europe accompanied by a Caquetío cacique. 
And on page 113 he states:
“..Dictum mihi est de ipsis, quod in duabus insulae hujus partibus duas 
colonias sive duos pagos indicos habeant. Feruntur omnes se christianos 
et catholicos nomenare: sed solum ac unicum christiani catholici nomen 
pretereaque nihil, ut audio habent…”
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 21 9/8/2014 5:11:48 PM
22
[…about them I was told that on this Island two villages or settlements 
still exist, it is said that they all call themselves Catholics. But from what I 
hear they are Catholics in name only, nothing else.] 
He also reports that when Jacob Beck was installed as director of the Dutch 
West India Company (WIC) in 1704, a group of Indian horsemen were 
present at the festivities. In his diary of the period 1707-1708, when he 
was living in Curaçao he mentions that he baptized some Indian children 
(Schabel,“Diurnum”,1707-1708). 
From the above it can be concluded that there were still “Indians” on Curaçao 
in the late 17th and early 18th century. Some of these were still living in 
separate villages but others already formed part of a catholic community. These 
“Indians” were Caquetíos. In the early 16th century, Caquetíos were abducted 
from Aruba, Bonaire and Curaçao during Spanish slave raids, to work in the 
gold mines in Hispaniola and it has been stated that those Indians that later 
returned to repopulate the islands would have been mostly Taíno or Guajiro or 
even Indians of other tribes. The writings of Schabel do not seem to support 
this idea.
The first African slaves and freed slaves were in contact with these Caquetío . 
Even though they were not very numerous, Indigenous people were therefore 
definitely present and part of the substratum when Papiamentu emerged. 
In his book Het volk van de grote Manaure, Father R.H. Nooyen gives 
numerous examples of contacts between people of Indigenous and African 
descent, during the late 17th and the 18th century, that he found in early 
records of the Catholic Church. The book of baptisms of 1677, which was 
mentioned earlier, is one of the earliest such records. In this book of baptisms 
it is mentioned that in this year 108 Indians, 209 slaves and some mulattoes 
and whites were baptized (Nooyen, 1995). He also names some families in 
Banda Abou which are nowadays considered to be purely of African descent as 
having Indigenous ancestors (Nooyen, 1979). Schabel (“Diurnum”, 1707/08) 
also mentions baptisms of Indian children where blacks were present or acted 
as one of the godparents and at one such occasion he adds:
 “Haec, si quae in mundo varietas me delectate, mihi in sacris baptismis 
non infrequens” [If there is anything that delights me it is this diversity 
and this is not infrequent at holy baptisms.]
Many of these Indians were probably already of mixed blood, which would 
have given them protection against Old World diseases, but were still described 
and recognized as “Indians”. 
During a visit to Bonaire where he baptized many children Schabel remarks:
 “...Inter parentes indios etiam comparuit miles natione germanus vel 
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 22 9/8/2014 5:11:48 PM
23
 potius polonus, patria Dantiscanus. Hic cum muliere inda (:matrimonium 
 ad libitum:) uxoratus erat, et aliquot ex ea parvulos filiolus suos ad 
 baptismum adduxit...” [Among the Indian parents there also was a soldier, 
 a German or rather (more accurately) a Pole from Dantzig. He was with 
 an Indian wife (to whom he was freely married) (i.e. because he liked her, 
 she was his free choice) and brought some small children he had with her, 
 to be baptized].
In Curaçao the Indians were simply swamped by a much larger African gene 
pool than those in Aruba or Bonaire. Mitochondrial DNA studies in Aruba 
indicate mostly Indigenous and to a lesser extent some sub-Saharan African 
ancestry (Toro-Labrador, Wever & Martínez-Cruzado, 2003). I am convinced 
that a similar mitochondrial DNA investigation in those African descended 
Curaçaoan families which were already on the island before the influx of AfroCaribbean workers during the oil boom in the early 20th century, (especially 
those whose ancestors lived in Banda Abou) would more or less be the 
mirror image of the Aruba results, i.e., mostly African, but to a lesser extent 
Fig. 3 - e church of Santa Ana in Paraguaná.
e village of Santa Ana, which is situated 
South of the Cerro de Santa Ana, already 
existed in 1571 (Gasparini, Gonzalez Batista 
and Margolies, 1985). Building of the church 
probably began around 1661, it was nished 
before the end of the 17th century.
A sign on this church reads:
“Iglesia de Santa Ana de Paraguaná
Monumento Nacional de Venezuela
Construida al nales del siglo XVII 
como templo de adoctrinamiento para
impartir enseñanza religiosa a los Indios
que vivian en Santa Ana
Fue la primera Iglesia edicada en Paraguaná 
”…..
e church of Santa Ana de Paraguaná
National monument of Venezuela
It was built at the end of the 17 th century 
as a church to indoctrinate the Indians which 
lived in Santa Ana with religious knowledge.
It was the rst church built in Paraguaná.
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 23 9/8/2014 5:11:50 PM
24
part Indian and European ancestry as well. Many of the Caquetío words in 
Papiamentu are still in general use, but others are nowadays only rarely used 
and sometimes only known by older people. In Curaçao today, such words 
often can be traced back to the Banda Abou area (e.g., katana, kiwa karate, 
shilib, wawuya).
In 1743 many of the remaining Indigenous people on Curacao moved to Coro. 
They were transported by a Dutch vessel (Nooyen, 1979). This may indicate 
that by this time they were not crossing over to Venezuela in their own canoes 
anymore. Although some Indians remained, this last emigration may have 
ended the presence of Indians as a separate group. In 1747, Van Laar, the 
secretary of the WIC, reported that there were still 1300 Indians on Curaçao 
(Nooyen, 1995). This is a surprisingly high number which may be inaccurate 
or could include a large number of persons of mixed descent. Between 1770 
and 1780 Indians are still mentioned quite regularly in the baptism records 
of the Catholic Church (Nooyen, 1995). By the end of the 18th century the 
last Indigenous people had been completely absorbed into the rest of the 
population. 
In Aruba and Bonaire Indigenous people maintained their identity as a separate 
group somewhat longer, e.g., when Father (Pater) van Koolwijk and Pinart 
published their lists of Indigenous words in use in Aruba in the late 19th 
century. Several of the surviving Caquetío words in Papiamentu come from 
these islands. There were many contacts between the Indians from “Pueblo 
Nuevo de la Asunción” in Curaçao and those from “Alto Vista” in Aruba. In 
the early records of the Catholic Church (1677), Indians from Aruba are also 
mentioned as being present during baptisms of African descended people in 
Curaçao (Nooyen, 1979). Indians had been mixing with African and European 
descended people from an early stage and some of their offspring ended up 
Fig. 4 and 5 - Canoes at Bubali, Aruba, 1905.
e pictures were taken by J. Boeke in 1905 and published in 1907.
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 24 9/8/2014 5:11:51 PM
25
in Aruba. This can explain some of the African words found in the Indian 
wordlist compiled by Pinart in Aruba. 
It is not known when Indigenous people ceased travelling to Aruba in canoes. 
It has been attested that in later years they began travelling as passengers 
on other vessels, or perhaps in small sail-assisted vessels of their own. In 
October 1634 and August 1635, the Spaniard Diego Hernandes Carudo, made 
reconnaissance trips from Venezuela to Curaçao to reconnoiter Dutch defenses. 
He travelled in a piragua (canoe) equipped with sails (Cardot, 1982). During 
the first trip, he travelled with some “Indios Curaçao”. On the second trip 
he was accompanied by twelve soldiers. Since a piragua has no or almost 
no keel, the sails must have been small auxiliary sails which nonetheless 
facilitated travelling considerably. In Aruba, the Indigenous people from Alto 
Vista maintained regular contacts with priests at the pueblo de Santa Ana in 
Paraguaná well into the 18th and early 19th centuries. These contacts were 
very likely maintained utilizing their own vessels (Nooyen, 1995). Canoes 
were in use for fisheries up to the early 20th century, a photograph of two 
canoes was taken in 1905 near Bubali in Aruba (Boeke, 1907).
5. Caquetío words in Papiamentu
Papiamentu is a creole language. African influence is very strong in the 
grammar and there are also some African words in the lexicon. Many words of 
African origin are related to folklore, others are names of musical instruments 
and of animals and plants which are also found in Africa (e.g., maribomba
‘wasp’, guiambo ‘ocra’). The lexicon consists mostly of words of Spanish 
and Portuguese origin, but about a quarter of the lexicon is of Dutch origin. 
Schabel says in his ”Notitia” of 1705:
 “Hispanice enim plerique omnes, vel saltum criolio, hoc est, corrupte 
loquuntur” [..Most speak Spanish, or at least Creole, which is a corrupted 
speech (Spanish)]. 
He does not however mention the name Papiamentu. The earliest reference 
to the Papiamentu language as such dates from 1747 (Coomans-Eustatia, 
2005). From 1806 to 1816, Curaçao was occupied by the British, but in older 
Papiamentu there is hardly any English influence. At the end of the 18th and 
in the early 19th centuries there were many French immigrants on the island, 
many of which left the island during the English occupation. Papiamentu has 
some French words, but the French did not contribute much to the lexicon. 
A village named Jan Doret is, however, named after the Frenchman Jean 
Doray. This can be explained by the fact that Papiamentu was already a fully 
established language at the time of the presence of these immigrants and during 
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 25 9/8/2014 5:11:51 PM
26
the English occupation. Nowadays technical terms often derive from English 
and English influence on Papiamentu is increasing.
When names of local animals and plants are also found on the Spanish 
Mainland, this does not necessarily imply that the Papiamentu form is derived 
from the mainland. dividivi very likely is the original Caquetío form, it is not 
necessarily derived from the mainland divedive. There are several Taíno words 
in Papiamentu, which are also used in Spanish. Papiamentu words like casabí, 
kanoa, komehein, kunuku, maïshi, pita and sabana all derive from Taíno, and 
although it seems likely that they entered into Papiamentu via Spanish, some of 
the same words are found in other Arawakan languages and could very likely 
have been used in Caquetío as well, since it was closely related to Taïno. pita
is very likely not Caquetío, since Caquetío used kokuy, but still the possibility 
cannot be fully excluded. In addition to the form maïshi, Papiamentu also uses 
the forms mainshi, where the insertion of the <n> could be a Bantu influence 
and also the form mahishi, which is commonly used in Bonaire. mahishi could 
very well be an original Caquetío form. 
The Caquetío influence in Papiamentu is small, but there are definitely a 
few original Caquetío words in Papiamentu. In most cases absolute proof is 
lacking, since only one short Caquetío wordlist from Venezuela has survived 
to the present (Oliver, 1989). This has led some to claim that no original 
Caquetío words remain in Papiamentu. Such researchers reason that, since the 
Dutch deported the Indigenous people, all, or almost all the Indigenous words 
in Papiamentu: 1) entered the language via Spanish; 2) were brought in from 
Venezuela from related Indigenous languages such as Guajiro; and/or 3) were 
the contribution of the Taíno and other Indigenous people brought to Curaçao 
by the Spanish (Kramer, 2004). 
While it is certainly true that many Indigenous words came in these ways, 
other words must certainly be original local Caquetío words. In almost all 
cases these are names of local plants and animals and toponyms. Several 
of these words are only used on either Aruba or Bonaire (or sometimes on 
both) where there was of course a stronger Caquetío presence. Even though 
Papiamentu primarily developed on Curaçao it must also have been influenced 
by speakers from these islands. From an examination of the structure of 
some of these toponyms found in Curaçao and a comparison between these 
toponyms and those found in Aruba and Bonaire, it can be seen that the forms 
used in Papiamentu in many cases must be closer to the original Caquetío 
forms than similar mainland words which underwent Spanish influence. 
We will now consider some of the phonological features that could indicate 
Caquetío origins for words in Papiamentu.
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 26 9/8/2014 5:11:51 PM
27
Words with ‘shi’ /Σi/ as prefix, infix or suffix (-/Σi/, /Σi/- and -/Σi/-) are often 
original Caquetío words. kadushi, kadushi pushi, bushi, are closer to the 
original Caquetío than the related forms from the mainland, kaduche, buche. 
Shimarucu is certainly more original than the form semaruco. This we can 
see when comparing to the toponyms, where the occurrence of /Σi/ is quite 
common. It is interesting that in the earliest Spanish reference to what in 
Paraguaná is nowadays called caduche, we find caduchi, Papiamentu uses 
kadushi (see below). shuata and shiwata are original and do not derive from 
Spanish aciguatar. This can be deduced from the fact that the form shiwata is 
also used in Aruba.
/Σi/ syllables in Papiamentu are also found in words which are definitely not of 
Caquetío or even Amerindian origin. In Portuguese we sometimes also find the 
<x> pronounced as /Σ/. Papiamentu lagadishi (lizard) is probably derived from 
Portuguese lagartixa (in Brazil it is often pronounced lagartiesje) or may be 
from Spanish lagartija. Spanish cimarrón becomes shimaron in Papiamentu, 
as in watapana shimaron, which in Papiamentu refers to a wild or feral form 
of a plant or animal. In Dutch we find –sje and –tje which can become –shi or 
-chi in Papiamentu. For example: dubbeltje – debchi, kast –cashi (in this case 
the Papiamentu form could be derived from the diminutive kastje. The frequent 
use of /Σi/ syllables in Papiamentu, in many words which do not derive from 
Caquetío, could very well be a Caquetío influence. 
Words with the gua- prefix and names of trees ending in -o in Spanish may 
be Caquetío words which underwent Spanish influence. It is interesting to 
note that some of these words retain the original /w/ sound in Papiamentu. The 
Spanish language is known to replace /w/ sounds with /gw/ (written <gu>, as 
illustrated in the following examples:
English: winch, Spanish: guinche
Nahuatl: ahuacatl, Spanish: aguacate
Carib: iwana, Island Carib: iuana, Spanish: iguana
Arabic: Oed el Kebir, Spanish: Guadalquivir
The Papiamentu words watapana, wayaká and watakeli thus seem more 
original than guatapaná, guayacán, guatacare, guatacaro etc. 
In Spanish trees are usually male, while their fruits or other products are 
female. For example: el caobo, ‘mahogany tree’, la caoba, ‘mahogany 
wood’. Thus when indicating the tree guatacare this word will tend to change 
to guatacaro. Also compare: shimaruku with cemaruco and semerúca. 
Papiamentu -huri or-uri is very likely the equivalent of the mainland Caquetío 
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 27 9/8/2014 5:11:51 PM
28
–ure, which according to Cruz Esteves (1989) means ‘root’. The plants 
hurihuri, karishuri and marihuri/manihuri all have roots which are used for 
either medicinal purposes or food.
bara means tree in Caquetío, and it could have been changed to bari
(analogous to Lokono: balli) or bari could have been in turn derived from 
bara + diminutive i, = ‘small tree’. In the case of the kalabari, a large tree, this 
explanation does not hold, but it could be that the original form was Kalabara
and that this was changed over to kalabari in later times, to conform with 
the other tree names ending in -bari, and to facilitate pronunciation, when 
the original meaning of -bara was lost. In a similar way the name tarabara, 
a shrub could have been derived from tarabari. Papiamentu names of plants 
ending in – bana or – pana could be derived from Caquetío - bana or - pana
which indicates a leaf or a leaf like flat structure in that language.
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 28 9/8/2014 5:11:51 PM
29
6. Words in Papiamentu likely to be of Caquetío Origin 
(excluding toponyms)
Since no absolute proof exists and indeed, many other Amerindian words 
were introduced into Papiamentu (van Buurt & Joubert, 1997) it is sometimes 
difficult to decide which Indian words are likely to be of Caquetío origin. Thus 
the following listing has a subjective element.
ashibi (A) - a small biting insect also called praga (Portuguese: a praga ‘the
 curse’), Guajiro: shipe’. Along the north coast of Colombia plaga is used for 
 biting insects such as mosquitoes and gnats. 
batutu (C) - see maniweri, manuweri 
bulabari (B) - a tree (Guaiacum sanctum) which is related to Lignum vitae 
 (Guaiacum officinale), but is somewhat smaller
bushi (A, B) (P1) - a globular cactus, Melon cactus, Turk’s cap (Melocactus 
 spp.); this word is also used for sea urchins. In Curaçao we find the bushito 
 (composed of Caquetío: bushi and the Spanish diminutive -ito). The 
 bushito is a small globular cactus (Mammillaria mammillaris syn. 
 Mamillaria simplex). This cactus is not found on Aruba and Bonaire. The 
 existence of the name bushito on Curaçao indicates that the word bushi was 
 formerly also used in Curaçao, where it was later displaced by the name 
 milon di seru (litt: ‘melon of the hill(s)’.
bushicuri (A) - a shrub (Morisonia americana)
catashi (A) (P13) - a shrub, (Phyllantus botryanthus). Aruba uses a Papiamentu 
 spelling which is different from that of Curaçao and Bonaire, where catashi 
 is written katashi. 
chibichibi (B) - a small bird, the bananaquit, (Coereba flaveola bonairensis)
chogogo (B,C), chogogo [chògògò] (A) - the greater flamingo (Phoenicopterus 
 ruber)
chuchubi (A, C, B) - the tropical mockingbird (Mimus gilvus)
cushicuri (A) – a climbing cactus (Acanthocereus tetragonus)
dabaruida, yaga dabaruida, yaga (A) (P2) - a shrub or small tree 
 (Pithecellobium unguis-cati) that has quite flexible twigs with sharp 
 downward curved thorns, like cat-claws. In a list from 1880 with Indian 
 words from Aruba made by Father van Koolwijk we find dabaroida (Hartog, 
 1953). The Pinart wordlist from1890 gives dabaraida. Lokono dabáda 
 means ‘nail’ or ‘claw’. dabára means ‘hair’, ida – ‘surrounded by’, ‘in, 
 with’, ‘skin’ (these are related meanings) See: De Goeje (1928). Pinart also 
 gives a formula which the Aruba Indians used to remove cactus spines from 
 the human body “Una areya rafayete dudrea ebanero a bono, caburo 
 copudado daburi.” Pinart gives no translation for this formula, but we can 
 speculate that daburi could refer to the cactus spines. In a Shebayo wordlist 
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 29 9/8/2014 5:11:51 PM
30
 from Trinidad dating from 1594-95 published in Taylor (1977), we find 
 dabodda and dabádoh for ‘nail’, ‘claw’. Shebayo is the Trinidad variant of 
 the Arawakan Lokono language.
dato (A), datu (C) - In Curaçao this is the columnar cactus Stenocereus griseus 
 syn. Lemareocereus griseus. In Bonaire it is called yatu or yato. In Aruba 
 this cactus is called kadushi while the columnar cactus Cereus repandus 
 was sometimes called dato, although usually more commonly called breba. 
 This can be very confusing. Originally Caquetío datu applied to the fruit 
 (see kadushi below). According to Oliver the suffix –ato indicates a family 
 relationship. d-ato is the daughter of the yato. In Lokono otu, uttu means 
 ‘daughter’ (De Goeje, 1928).
dividivi (A, C, B) (P3) - dividivi originally is the fruit of the watapana tree 
 (Caesalpinia coriaria), but nowadays the name also applies to the plant and 
 in Aruba and Curaçao Papiamento/ Papiamentu it is also a synonym of 
 watapana. However in Aruba watapana is more commonly used for the 
 plant. In Bonaire dividivi only refers to the fruit.
dori, dori maco (A, C, B) (P4) - Colombian four-eyed frog, froth nest frog 
 (Pleurodema brachyops). This frog is native to Aruba, it is also found in 
 the savanna areas of Northern South America and Panama. In Venezuela it 
 is called sapito lipón ‘fat little toad’. It was introduced in Curaçao (1910) 
 and in Bonaire (1928). The name dori, dori maco originates in Aruba, 
 but is now used on all the three islands. This animal is mentioned in an old 
 Papiamentu rhyme from Aruba. This rhyme is still in use, it was already 
 noted down by the German Professor Martin around 1883 (van Meeteren,
 1947): 
Dori, dori maco, si mi muri, ken ta derami?, Ami, ami, ami
Dori, dori maco, ora mi muri, ken ta yorami?, Ami, ami, ami
[Dori, dori maco, if I die, who will bury me? Me, me, me
Dori, dori maco, when I die, who will cry for me? Me, me, me]
 The name maco is also found in Taïno, as the name of another frog (Tejera,
 1977). dori is an onomatopea. Thus dori maco is the frog that calls “do-ri”.
fofoti (A) (P5) - a type of mangrove tree (Laguncularia racemosa) 
gobí (C, B) - small calabash cut in two to serve as a small drinking beaker, –bí 
 probably means small.
gogorobí (C, B) (P6) - whistle made from a small calabash. In this case –bí 
 probably also means small. gogoro - could be derived from kokoro which 
 refers to a thick-skinned leaf or a rind. Compare: kokorobana, a plant with a
 thick-skinned leaf and kokorobi, made from a small calabash rind.
gutu (A,C,B) - General name for a parrotfish. This word is probably related 
 to kutu. The word contains the root –utu, meaning fish in many Arawak 
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 30 9/8/2014 5:11:52 PM
31
 languages. Transformations from K to G are fairly common. See also kasha
 kutu and also compare with the toponym Manparia Cutu in Bonaire.
hubada (A), hobada (B) (P7) - a thorny tree, (Acacia tortuosa)
hurihuri (C) - winding or climbing brush (Capparis flexuosa)
huliba (A) - Capparis indica and also Capparis odoratissima
ishiri (B) (P9) - a tree (3-7m high) with yellow-brownish globular fruit 
 (Crateva tapia), also called Surun. This tree grows in humid areas in and 
 along the flow beds of the “rooien”, where water runs during the rainy 
 season. In Bonaire we have the toponym “rooi Ishiri”. In Aruba this tree 
 is very rare, which is not surprising since Aruba has a somewhat more arid 
 climate.
kadushi (C, B), cadushi (A) - a columnar cactus (Cereus repandus), in Aruba 
 it is more commonly called breba, which is derived from Spanish breva. In 
 Aruba the cactus which is called cadushi (Stenocereus griseus) is the one 
 called datu in Curaçao; this can be very confusing. In 1579 the “Relación de 
 Nueva Segovia” gives a description of Paraguaná and states the following: 
“…Hay unos árboles que commúnmente se llaman Cardones de 
ramas y estas ramas espinosas que no llevan hojas sino solamente 
espinas y muy espesas de manera que no se puede tocar con la mano 
y son tan largas como una aguja y otras menos y estos arboles serán 
del alto de una lanza y unos mas y otros menos llevan dos maneras 
de fruta a manera de ciruelas de monje en la hechura y en cantidad 
mucho mayor. (…) llamanla en lengua de indio Caduchi que nosotros 
llamamos brevas, la otra fruta se llama en lengua de Indios, Dato.” 
[…There are some trees which are commonly called Cardones with 
branches and these branches are spiny and do not have leaves, but 
only spines, which are densely packed, you cannot touch them with 
your hands and they are as long as a needle and some are shorter and 
these trees reach the length of a lance, some are higher and some 
are shorter. They give two types of fruit, which when ripe look like 
”ciruelas de monje” (litt: prunes of the Monks) but in much larger 
numbers.(…) the Indians call them (the fruits) caduchi, which we call 
brevas and the other fruit is called dato, in the Indian language]. 
 In Guajiro we find: kayúsi, kayúsí. Here we see that kadushi, like datu, 
 dato originally applied to the fruit.
kadushi pushi (C, B) (P10) - In Aruba this cactus is called breba di pushi. 
 A somewhat smaller columnar cactus with finer needles (Pilosocereus 
 lanuginosus). In Guajiro, püche is a melon cactus (Jusayú & Zubiri, 1977) 
 it also applies to Cactus caesius a somewhat cylindrical melon cactus 
 (Perrin, 1980). Nowadays this cactus is called (Melocactus curvispinus 
 subsp. caesius). Since kadushi is Caquetío, it is likely that the kadushi pushi 
 is also Caquetío.
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 31 9/8/2014 5:11:52 PM
32
kalabari (C, B) - a large tree, (Zanthoxylum flavum)
kamari (C, B), camari (A) (P11) - (Coccoloba swartzii) a small shrub related to 
 the sea grape (Coccoloba uvifera)
karawara (C), carawara, cawara (A) koahara, koahari (B) (P12) - (Cordia 
 dentata) a shrub or small tree, with white, somewhat translucent and slimy 
 round fruits. In Venezuela it is called caujaro.
karishuri (B) - a small shrub, whose roots are used for medicinal purposes
 (Cordia curasavica syn. Cordia cylindrostachia)
karkidaki, kashidaki (B) (P13) - a shrub (Phyllantus bothryanthus)
kasha kutu (C) (P14) - the name of the tiger grouper (Mycteroperca tigris). 
 Compare this name with gutu and with the toponym manparia cutu in 
 Bonaire.
katana (C) - corn on the cob (Zea mays), sometimes referring to corn cobs 
 with large or colored kernels. In Guajiro kutána refers to certain varieties 
 of maize with a large cob and large kernels. This is an example of a word 
 sometimes still used in the Banda Abou area of Curaçao
kayuda (C, B), cayuda (A) - kayuda is a tropical fruit and tree (Annona 
 glabra) related to Soursop. Although it is native to the Caribbean region and 
 Central and South America, the few areas where it is found growing in 
 Curaçao suggest that it is probably not native to the island and may have 
 been introduced by the Caquetío Indians. In Taíno it was named Cayure. 
 This indicates that this name is probably of Arawakan origin. In Venezuela it 
 is called cayúde. Kayuda may be the original Caquetío name.
kebedu [kebédu] (A) - scorpion fish (Scorpaena spp.)
kedébi (B) - very large as in yuana kedébi (very large iguana) and gutu kedébi, 
 a large parrotfish, larger than others; the blue parrot fish (Scarus coeruleus)
kedebre (A) - plumed scorpion fish (Scorpaena grandicornis)
kiberi [kibéri] (A) - spotted scorpion fish (Scorpaena plumieri)
kiviti (A) - a shrub or small tree, with white flowers (Croton niveus)
kiwa (A, C, B) - kiwa is the West Indian top shell (Cittarium pica). This word
 is also found in Venezuela as quigua and in Cuba as cigua. 
kiwa karate, kiwa karati (C, B) - the name kiwa karate, which refers to a 
 gastropod with a marbled appearance, which is edible but can cause food 
 poisoning, is only found in Curaçao and Bonaire. In Curaçao some older 
 people in the Banda Abou area are still familiar with this word, which is not 
 in common use anymore. It is not known with certainty which shell is the 
 kiwa karate, it could be Turbo castanea or Cypraea zebra (synonyms for 
 Cypraea zebra are Talparia zebra and Macrocypraea zebra). In Venezuela 
 and other surrounding countries a skin disease is known which is caused by 
 a fungus and which causes a pattern of light blotches. In Venezuela this 
 disease was called carare or carate (L. Alvarado, 1921). The word Carate 
 often refers to such a marbled or blotched pattern (Dicc. Vox).
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 32 9/8/2014 5:11:52 PM
33
kododo, cododo (A, B) (P15) - whiptail lizard (Cnemidophorus spp.)
kokorobana, cocorobana (A) (P16) - Sea purslane, white lavendel, a halophilic 
 shrub, with thick leaves, found near the coast or in the vicinity of salt pans 
 (Mallotonia gnaphalodes)
kokorobí (C, B) - a small calabash, cut in half over its length and used as 
 a scoop to pick up water, or sometimes a small calabash cut in two to serve 
 as a small drinking beaker, also called gobí. In this case –bi probably means 
 ‘small’.
koubati, kaubati (B), caushati, coushati (A) - a tree 3-6 m high, 
 (Krugiodendron ferreum)
kwihi, kuigi, cuihi, kuihi (A), kuhí, kuí, kwida (B) - mesquite tree (Prosopis 
 juliflora). kwihi sounds more original, is in better harmony with the sounds 
 of the toponyms than the Venezuelan form cuji. The other name for this tree 
 used in the Papiamentu of Curaçao, indju is definitely not Caquetío and 
 came via Spanish, it is also used in Nicaragua and the Yucatán.
lobi (A, C, B) - In Aruba this is an expression meaning 'how small!”. In 
 Curaçao and Bonaire a small watermelon, or sometimes another fruit like a 
 small papaya is called lobi. -bi refers to smallness. In Lokono l(o)- is a 
 prefix that can indicate the meaning “He (is)…” (de Goeje, 1928).
mahawa (A, C, B) (P17) - a reef fish, the creole fish (Paranthias furcifer). 
 On Aruba and Bonaire a tree, Ficus brittonii, is also called mahawa.
mahoso, mahos (C, B), mahos (A) - ugly. Guajiro muhusu, mujusu means 
 ‘bad’, Lokono: maisu- ini also means ‘bad’.
makambí (C, B), macabi [macabí] (A) - lady fish (Elops saurus), in this case 
 the Spanish version, macabí is closer to the original Caquetío than Curaçao 
 Papiamentu makambi, which underwent African influence (the insertion 
 of the /m/). In Aruba the form macabí was maintained. Although this word 
 is also found in Taïno, I believe it to be Caquetío as well and unlikely to be 
 imported from Taïno. This fish has many very small bones –bi could 
 indicate ‘small’ and could refer to these bones. During archeological 
 excavations of a Caquetío village at Tanki Flip in Aruba, 5.2 % of all fish 
 remains found were lady fish (Versteeg & Rostain, 1997). Nowadays macabí 
 is not usually eaten because of its many bones, but it can be used for fish 
 soup.
makurá (C, B) (P18) - jumby beans; a climbing vine often found on columnar 
 cactus. It has pods with small red colored oval beans with a black spot, 
 which are very poisonous (Abrus precatorius). There may exist a relation to 
 Lokono ikira ‘tears’ and ma-kira ‘no tears’, ‘to dry’ (de Goeje, 1928). 
manaria (C, B) - See wampanaria
manuweri, maniweri (C) - a creeping vine with relatively large yellow flowers 
 and a beetlike edible root (Amoreuxia wrightii syn. Amoreuxia palmatifida). 
 The fruit is called batutu. 
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 33 9/8/2014 5:11:52 PM
34
marihuri, manihuri (C, B) (P19) - This is a wild cassava species (Manihot 
 carthagenensis), which is not indigenous; it was introduced to the islands 
 from the dry regions of South America by the Indians. In Aruba it is called 
 yuca amara, yuca guajira or yuca di mondi. Its roots are poisonous, and 
 have to be treated like all bitter cassava to be eaten. It has a lower food 
 value than normal cassava, but its roots are much more durable and it can 
 stand considerable drought. In former times this plant was used by the 
 African descended population as a reserve food for very bad times, tempu 
 berans (Litt: ‘rancid times’, from Dutch beransd). Every century there are 
 a few extended dry periods, when there is hardly any rain, which may last 
 up to two years and nine months or even somewhat longer. Here we see 
 an Indian practice being continued by their black descendants. Obviously it 
 was not a preferred food, but something that was eaten only when practically 
 nothing else was available. It was also used to poison cats and dogs. If we 
 compare with Taïno maní which means ‘peanut’, and combine this with –
 huri, manihuri could very well mean ‘peanut shaped root’, which would be 
 a very apt description of the form of its root knolls, even though the 
 marihuri root knolls are much larger. 
mashibari (C), mafobari, mahubari (B), macubari (A) - Small tree or shrub, 
 (Guapira pacurero syn. Pisonia bonairensis)
oromani (A, C, B) - the chain moray (Echidna catenata). This moray is 
 common in the shallow water areas of coral reefs; it is black with a 
 reticulated network pattern of yellow stripes. It is very unlikely that this 
 word is derived from Spanish oro and English ‘man’. Unlike Sranan 
 Tongo (a Creole language of Surinam), there are no English words in 
 older Papiamentu and certainly the combination of a partly Spanish and 
 partly English word would be very unusual. Such words are quite rare and 
 are found only in modern Papiamentu. An example would be puwitu-killer 
 (Spanish pollito and English ‘killer’, meaning an older man with a very 
 young girlfriend or vice versa). The name oromani is not found in Sranan 
 Tongo, nor is this animal found on the muddy or sandy coasts of Surinam. 
 An Arawakan etymology for oromani seems more likely. In Lokono ori 
 means ‘snake’ and the suffix –man or –mana is found in the names of 
 many aquatic animals, especially water snakes (Taylor, 1977). Lokono oroli 
 is a large mythical snake. Taïno: caïman, caïmana. Island Carib (Kallinago): 
 makáyuman, a lobster.
palúli (C, B) - the mangrove mussel (Brachidontes exustus). The late A.J. 
 Maduro was of the opinion that this name could be derived from the French 
 palourde. This however seems unlikely since in the French West-Indian 
 islands palourde is a name which is applied to an entirely different group 
 of shells (Codakia spp.). Furthermore there are almost no examples of 
 names of indigenous local plants and animals in Papiamentu which are 
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 34 9/8/2014 5:11:52 PM
35
 derived from French. Practically the only examples are the snapper kapitán 
 (French capitaine), which however could possibly also derive from Spanish 
 and the name kakabolli (Creole French: cacabelli) which however does not 
 relate to the same fish. It is thus likely that palúli is of Caquetío origin.
patalewa (C, B) (P20) - the barn owl (Tyto alba). In Curaçao this word is not in
 use anymore, nowadays the barn owl is called palabrua. The Dutch traveller 
 Teenstra who visited Curaçao mentions this name in the account of his 
 voyages (1828/29 and 1833/34) which was published in two volumes in 
 1836 and 1837. Teenstra is known as an accurate observer and a dependable 
 source of information. In Bonaire the Osprey (Pandion haliaetus) is called
 Patalewa (Prins et al, 2009). The name Partawela is nowadays used in 
 Curaçao for the Falki (Buteo albicaudatus). This is a corruption of Patalewa 
 that has been popularized fairly recently.
sawaka (C) - the underworld, the realm of the dead, the beyond. In old 
 Papiamentu the expression baha na sawaka existed, meaning ‘to descend to 
 the underworld’ or ‘to die’. In modern Papiamentu sawaka is used as 
 “Dead!” or to express the idea that something went very wrong. In 
 Lokono sa- can indicate a small plurality, like 2-6 (de Goeje, 1928). Waka 
 means underground. According to Oliver Caquetío wakaubana refers to an 
 underground creek, and -bana refers to its being covered. In Aruba we find 
 the toponym wakubana. Pinart (1890) gives Wakubana as the name of a 
 hill in Aruba. This name is not in use anymore. On a map of Aruba of 1825 
 (Rijksarchief The Hague) it is named Wacobana. In Colombia guacar means 
 ‘to bury something’, ‘a burial’, and cavar guacas, ‘to dig holes’. The Taïno 
 in Hispaniola knew a cave named Guacayarima. This cave was the abode of 
 a large mythical monster. yarima means ‘anus’, guaca “underground area, 
 underground region”. Guacayarima then means ‘anus which leads to the 
 underworld’ (Tejera, 1977).
sawáwa (C) - a few large waves, a wave train. This word was used in old 
 Papiamentu (Brenneker, 1978); it is not in use anymore. 
shilib, shilip (C) - a small whiptail lizard (Cnemidiphorus murinus murinus) or 
 a small green iguana (Iguana iguana). This word is still found in the Banda 
 Abou area. Some people (most) insist that it only applies to a small whiptail 
 lizard, others that it applies only to a small green iguana, yet others say 
 it can be used for both. Such divergence is common with little used words 
 and illustrates how a name for one species, given time is often transferred to 
 another species.
shimarucu (A), shimaruku (C, B)(P21) - small tree or shrub with orange-red 
 fruits, which are very rich in vitamin C (Malpighia emarginata). The word 
 cemaruco, semerúca is found in Venezuela Lokono: seme means ‘sweet’ (de 
 Goeje, 1928).
shirishiri (A, C, B) - entrails. There is no proof this is an Indian word. It 
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 35 9/8/2014 5:11:52 PM
36
 has been suggested it came from Africa. Nevertheless it could very well be 
 Caquetío.
shoco, choco (A) - a small burrowing owl found in Aruba (Athene 
 cunicularia). In Guajiro it is called shokóhin (Jusayú & Zubiri, 1977). 
 shoco, choco (the Papiamento spelling in Aruba) is very likely the original 
 Caquetío name.
shoshori (C, B), shoshoro (A) (P22+23) - a climbing vine (Passiflora foetida)
shuata (C, B), shiwata, shuata (A) - to get fish poisoning, nowadays it is used 
 as a general term for food poisoning.
stanibari (B) - a small shrub, with slender twigs and white flowers (Antirrhoea 
 acutata)
tampañá (C, B) (P24) - The edible fruit of the kadushi columnar cactus (Cereus 
 repandus). There could be a relation with Paraujano (Añú) tapaña, which 
 refers to the great-grandparents of a man. The fruit which contain numerous 
 small seeds can be seen as a great-grandparent with numerous offspring. The 
 insertion of the /m/ is probably a later African influence.
tapushi (A, C, B) - originally an ear of maize (Zea mays), nowadays also an 
 ear of sorghum (Sorghum vulgare) or other grasses. In Guajiro several 
 similar words are found that indicate a family relationship, such as apüshí, 
 tapü’shi, püpüshi, jüpü’shi and jüshi. tapü’shi refers to a matrilineal clan.
tarabara (A) (P25) - a shrub with flexible twigs and sharp cat-claw like curved 
 spines (Mimosa distachya).
teishi, tishi (A) - a white bird of prey, probably the white-tailed kite (Elanus 
 leucurus), which sometimes crosses over to Aruba from Paraguaná as a 
 casual visitor. In Aruba we also find the hill Sero Tishi. This is also written
 as teishi, tijshi and tijsji (map of Werbata/Jonckheer, 1913).
waíki [waïki] (C, B) - homemade hygienic tampon for women, usually made 
 from the cloth of empty flour sacks, cotton and twine. These were in use 
 until the early 20th century. Presumably in earlier years they would have 
 been made from wild cotton (Gossypium hirsutum) and natural fibers, 
 such as agave fibers. Nowadays the word waïki, waíki has been replaced by 
 the brand name “kotex”, this word is used generically. In the Carib language 
 Cumanagoto we find the word huaïkur for a loin cloth. In Chaima, another 
 Carib language from Venezuela, we find the word guayuco, also for a 
 loincloth, in Guajiro we find wüsi. Although the meaning for these words 
 is somewhat different they seem to be related to waïki, waíki. Since the 
 word waïki, waíki is known only from these islands it is very likely an 
 original Caquetío word, even though there seem to be parallels with words 
 in Carib languages.
wakurá, wakuri (B) (P26) - a shrub or small tree, with small green globular 
 fruits, which blacken when ripe (Randia aculeata). It is also called Palu di 
 Lele.
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 36 9/8/2014 5:11:52 PM
37
waltaca (A) (P27) - the tree lizard Anolis lineatus . In Curaçao Anolis lineatus 
 is called totèki or kaku. In Bonaire Anolis bonairensis used to be called 
 lagadishi di palu, but nowadays the names totèki and kaku, which probably 
 originate in Curaçao are more commonly used. totèki is related to, or derived 
 from tuqueque, tuteque an Amerindian word used for geckos in Venezuela 
 and parts of Colombia. In Papiamentu geckos were formerly called totèki 
 pegapega, turtèki or turtiki pegapega. Nowadays they are called pega pega.
wampanaria (C, B) - seafans (Gorgonia ventalina and Gorgonia flabellum). 
 These gorgonians grow in the sea in shallow water where water movement 
 is strong. This word is related to the word manari, manáre, meaning 
 ‘strainer’ or ‘sieve’, in Guajiro manái. In the past in Papiamentu a sieve 
 was called manaria. These sea fans were used to sieve flour. wa- or wu- 
 often indicates a plurality, each fan has several leaf like structures.
waranawa (A, C, B) - salted mullet or sometimes another species of salted 
 fish. This word comes from Paraguaná and it seems to have been introduced 
 into Papiamentu via Spanish. In Paraguaná it is called guaranaro (the mullet 
 is called by its Spanish name lisa). Nevertheless it is very likely an original 
 Caquetío word, which in the past could have been used by the Caquetío on 
 the islands as well and may have been introduced into Papiamentu quite 
 long ago. It is not known whether the original Caquetío word referred to 
 the mullet or to its dried and salted form or both. Nowadays salted fish is 
 not produced in Curaçao and mullet is not a very popular fish since it is 
 often associated with muddy inner bays, while people prefer fish from the 
 open sea. In the past, when fish from the open sea were more difficult to 
 catch than those in shallow waters and inner bays, this could very well have 
 been different. It is known that the Caquetío used to eat fish such as warashi 
 and macabí, which today are not popular and are hardly eaten at all. At 
 present, waranawa refers exclusively to imported Venezuelan salted fish. 
 waranawa is also used figuratively as in Bo por skonde waranawa, ma bo 
 n’por skonde su oló (You can hide a waranawa, but you cannot hide its 
 smell).
warashi (A, B) (P28) - bonefish (Albula vulpes)
warawara (A, C, B) - the crested Caracara (Caracara cheriway syn. Polyborus
 plancus)
warwacowa, warwacoha, warbacoa (A, B), barbacoa (A) - the bare-eyed 
 pigeon (Columba corensis), Caquetio wakoa, Lokono wakokwa. Warwacoha 
 is the original form; this has later corrupted into Barbacoa, which is now 
 (sadly) the officially recognized standard (VOP, 2009).
warwarú (A, C, B) - whirlwind, tornado, waterspout or dust devil. Taylor 
 (1958) states:
 “Another possible and perhaps more likely etymon for warrawarrou 
 and warwarau is a word meaning ‘thunder’ (or ‘thunderstorm’), which 
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 37 9/8/2014 5:11:52 PM
38
 Sir Wm.Young recorded in 1792, from a Vincentian Carib in Tobago, 
 as warawiarou. Some 150 years earlier, Breton had recorded this word’s 
 Dominican equivalent as ouallouhúyourou; and some 150 years later, 
 I recorded its Central America Island-Carib equivalent as uaiuhúru. The 
 phonetic changes present no diffculty.” 
 In Guajiro we find wawaí for cyclone or tornado (Jusayú & Zubiri, 1977). 
 It is unlikely that warwarú would have been introduced into Papiamentu 
 from Island Carib and that at the same time it would have acquired a 
 somewhat different meaning. Nor is this word found in Spanish. Thus it is 
 likely an original Caquetío word that bears a family resemblance to a related 
 Island Carib (Kallinago) word. Island Carib is an Arawakan language 
 related to Caquetío which is called “Island Carib” because of strong Carib 
 influence in the language.
washiri (A, B) - egg of an iguana
watakeli (C), watakali (A), watakeri (B) (P29) - (Bourreria succulenta) a small 
 tree or shrub with small orange berries, used as food by birds, especially 
 parakeets, parrots and blue doves. In Venezuela it is called guatacare, 
 guatacaro. In English it is called bodywood, currant tree, pigeonberry, 
 (Bahama) strongbark or Bahama strongback.
watapana (A, C, B) (P30) - (Caesalpinia coriaria), a common indigenous tree 
 which is often bent by the wind. –apana refers to leaves, wa- or wu- often 
 indicates a plurality and also the idea of “having”, (de Goeje, 1928). The /t/ 
 could be a phonological addition to facilitate the pronunciation (epenthesis). 
 watapana probably means “has many (small) leaves”. This tree has 
 feathered leaves with many small leaflets. See also: dividivi. The form 
 guatapaná is found in Taïno and on the Spanish mainland.
wawuya (C) - an almost extinct name for the rufous-collared sparrow 
 (Zonotrichia capensis). This word is not in use anymore. Nowadays this bird 
 is called Chochorogai (male) or Chinchirinchi (female).
wayaca [wayacá] (A), wayaká (C, B) (P31) - The tree lignum vitae (Guaiacum 
 officinale), according to the Spanish cronistas in Taïno it is named guayacán, 
 a word nowadays also used in Spanish. This may also be a Caquetío word, 
 the form wayaká seems more original than guayacán and it is a very 
 common indigenous tree. The word guayacán is also used on the mainland. 
 On the other hand it seems strange that in Bonaire the closely related tree 
 Guaiacum sanctum is named bulabari, this makes one suspect that wayaká 
 could be an imported Taïno word. This example also demonstrates the 
 difficulty of deciding which Amerindian words in Papiamentu are likely to 
 be originally from Caquetío.
wimpiri (C, B) - a small insect, which does not bite like the “- Praga-“ but is 
 an annoyance anyway since it tends to enter the nose, eyes and ears. These 
 are Drosophila flies. The word is likely of Carib origin and derives from the 
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 38 9/8/2014 5:11:52 PM
39
 Karina form mapili or from mapiri, which is used in Cariban languages 
 in Venezuela. In Surinam the word mam’pier is used for the similar looking 
 Colocoides (biting midges, gnats) species (van Donselaar 1989), which in 
 Curaçao are called Praga. In Bonaire however the Praga is called Wimpiri. 
 It thus seems likely that the name Wimpiri originally applied to the biting 
 midges which in Curaçao Papiamentu are nowadays called Praga, while the 
 name Wimpiri was then transferred to the non-biting Drosophila flies. This is 
 yet another example of a name being transferred to another, usually 
 somewhat similar, species. Wimpiri is clearly related to similar words 
 in Cariban languages. It thus seems less likely that the form Wimpiri is of 
 Caquetío origin, however this possibility cannot be excluded; it could be the 
 result of Carib influence on the Caquetío language. The word Wimpiri is not 
 found in Spanish, Portuguese or Dutch and cannot have been introduced 
 into Papiamentu through any of these languages. In Aruba the word Ashibi is 
 in use, which is related to shipe in Guajiro (Wayu, Wayúu, Wahiro), an 
 Arawak language. Taíno, another Arawak language, used jejenes, xexenes. 
yaga (A) - see dabaruida
yiwiri (A, B) - white-tipped dove (Leptotila verrauxi), 
yuana (C, B), yuwana (A) (P32) - yuana (Iguana iguana) is found in Taïno as a 
 name for Cyclura iguanas, it is also used in Guajiro for the Green iguana 
 (Iguana iguana). It is very likely Caquetío as well. This is a very common 
 indigenous animal. Spanish uses iguana, which is derived from Carib iwana;
 it is thus not derived via Spanish. The form yuana kedébi indicates it is very 
 likely an original Caquetío word.
yuchi (C, B), yiuchi (A) - small child. In Guajiro we find; jouú, joú
Many of the words mentioned above (unless otherwise noted) are not found in 
Spanish, nor in the Diccionario de La Lengua Guajira (Jusayú & Zubiri, 1977), 
nor in the Taïno dictionaries by Tejera (1977) and Aquino (1977). These words 
are thus unlikely to have been imported into Papiamentu from Spanish, Taïno 
or Guajiro. 
7. Toponyms likely to be of Caquetío origin
Elements from Spanish include seru ‘hill’, pos ‘well’, boca ‘bay’, ‘cove’, 
punta ‘point’, cueba ‘cave’, and kibrá ‘fissure’, ‘creek’. rooi is derived 
from Spanish arroyo, a usually dry river bed. Names like Playa Kaketío in 
Curaçao, have been excluded. This is a location named after a nearby Caquetío 
settlement, but not an original Caquetío toponym. Many toponyms with 
Sabana or derived from Sabana, which are found on all three islands have 
also been excluded. An example is “de Savaan” (an old Caquetío settlement 
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 39 9/8/2014 5:11:52 PM
40
in Curaçao) but not an original Caquetío toponym. Sabana refers to a plain 
or somewhat flat area. In Yatu (Largu), Largu is in parentheses since it is not 
Caquetío.
Cudishi seems Caquetío, but could also be derived from Papiamentu kudishi, 
which is derived from Spanish. This however seems less likely. kudishi means 
‘avarice, greed, covetousness’ (in the Curaçao and Bonaire Papiamentu 
spelling the <c> becomes a <k>, but the original spelling of toponyms is 
maintained). In Papiamentu baranca means a large rock (in Spanish it is a 
gorge or ravine). Malmok is often considered to be an original Indian word, 
the name is found on both Aruba and Bonaire. However it could very well 
be derived from Dutch malle mok for this reason it is followed by a question 
mark.
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 40 9/8/2014 5:11:52 PM
41
Aruba
Anabui (Seru)
Anamichi
Andicuri, Andicouri
Angochi
Araburu
Arashi
Arikok, Avikok (Sero)
Aruba, Oruba, Orua
Avikurari
Ayo
Balashi
Barbacoa
Basiruti
Behika, Behuko
Boroncana
Bubali
Bucuti
Budui (Boca)
Boegoeroei, Bucurui (Sero)
Burubunu
Bushiri
Bushiribana
Butucu
Cababuna
Caburi
Cadushi (Largo)
Cadushi (Sero)
Camari
Camacuri
Canashito (Sero) 
Caushati (Sero)
Caruburi
Cashero
Cashunti (Baranca)
Casibari
Catashi
Catiri
Cawara
Choroni
Cocodoro
Cubeju
Cubou
Cucu (Sero) 
Cudarebo, Cudarebe
Curuburi, Corobori (Seru) 
Cuwana
Daimari, Damari (Rooi, Boca)
Eayac (Cuy grandi)
Fofoti
Guadirikiri, Wadirikiri (Cueva)
Guarero (Sero)
Hadicurari
Hadicuri
Hubada
Hudishibana (limestone terrace)
Huliba
Jaburibari (Seru)
Jucuri (Seru)
Juditi
Kadiwari
Kamay
Keito
Kimbaima, Kibaima
Kivarcu, Kivarco (Sero)
Kodekodectu
Koyari
Kudawecha, Kudawechi (Sero)
Kukurui
Kurimiauw, Kurimao
Mabon
Macuarima
Macubari
Madiki
Mahos (Boca)
Mahuma
Malmok ?
Manchebo
Masiduri
Matividiri
Moko
Nanki
Noka (Sero)
Paradera?
Paraguana, Parawana
Sasarawichi
Shaba
Shabururi, Shabiburi
Shidaharaca (Sero)
Shiribana
Siribana
Sividivi
Skepou ?
Suduri
Tarabana
Taratata, Tatarata
Tibushi
Tikibanaro
Teishi, Tijsji, Tishi (Sero)
Turibana
Uditi
Huliba, Uliba
Uña uña
Urataka (Sero)
Urirama (Boca)
Utie
Wakubana, Wacobana (Sero)
Wao-Wao (Sero) 
Warawao
Warawara (Sero)
Warerikiri
Wariruri
Wayaca
Weburi
Wiriwari (Boca)
Yamanota (Sero)
Yanana
Yara
Yuwana (Morto),Yuana (Morto)
Yuwiti,Yuiti
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 41 9/8/2014 5:11:52 PM
42
Curaçao
Adicoura (Klein Curaçao)
Cariatavo
Charomba (Salt pan)
Chinchó, Chinchorro
Choloma 
Cocori (Seru)
Codoko
Cudishi
Curazao, Curaçao
Maco
Macola
Mahuma
Maniguacoa
Padiki (nowadays Patrick) 
Parasasa
Wakawa, Wacao
Wanapa
Wandomi
Wanota
Watamula
Bonaire
Amboina
Bacuna
Bototó
Buynari, Buynare, Buinare
Cabuja (Seru) 
Caracao (Seru) 
Casicunda (Seru)
Curuburu 
Garati (Pos)
Guarati, Garati (Kibrá) 
Hobao (Seru)
Huba (Rooi)
Ishiri
Jua, Juwa (Seru)
Karati (Seru)
Kaumati (Seru)
Koahara, Koahari (Rooi)
Macoshi
Macutucao (Seru)
Malmok?
Manparia Cutu
Morotin
Nawati
Nikiboko
Onima (Boca, Cueba)
Orizjan (Cueba)
Roshikiri
Shishiribana (Seru)
Sorobon
Wamari
Wanapa
Wanico
Warahama, Warahami
Wasao (Seru)
Washikemba, Washikemoa 
(Boca)
Watapana
Wayacá
Wecua (Punta, Seru)
Yatu Bacu
Yatu (Largu)
Yuana (Seru)
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 42 9/8/2014 5:11:53 PM
43
8. Possible etymology and comments on Aruba toponyms 
Arashi - nowadays this is one of best sites to fish for warashi (bonefish, 
 Albula vulpes) in Aruba. This makes it likely that arashi could be the/a
 singular form of warashi. It is known that warashi was an important food
 item for the Aruba Caquetío. During archeological excavations of a Caquetío 
 village at Tanki Flip in Aruba, 13,7 % of all fish remains found were 
 bonefish (Versteeg & Rostain,1997). Nowadays the bonefish is popular for 
 sport fishing, it is not usually eaten because of its many bones, but it can be 
 used for fish soup.
Balashi - contains the root bala meaning the sea, Balashi is situated near the 
 sea.
Burubunu - in the Venezuelan state of Falcón, near Zazárida a small village 
 called Borobuno is found (Cruz Esteves, 1989).
Casibari - At this location there is a pile of very large rocks. ca-, ka- is a 
 localizer meaning ‘there is’, ‘there are’, siba or quiba means ‘stone’ or 
 ‘rock’, rí means ‘strong’, ‘hard’, ‘durable’. Casibari would then mean “there 
 are hard rocks.” The name of the island of Saba is probably also derived 
 from Siba, curiously in English the island is also called “The Rock”.
Hudishibana (P8) - a calcareous terrace, nowadays the site of a golf course. 
 juri, judi, hudi means ‘wind’ (Cruz Esteves, 1989), bana ‘wide’, ‘plain’. 
 Hudishibana would mean ‘windy plain’. The photograph (P8) was taken 
 before the present golf field was constructed.
Macuarima - Named after a legendary Indian girl with this name, who used to
 live there (Anonymous, 2004).
Matividiri - In Paraguaná a hill with a nearby village is called Matividiro 
 (Cruz Esteves, 1989).
Taratata, Tatarata - in the Venezuelan state of Falcón, the toponyms: Taratara,
 Taratare and Tatatarare are found (Cruz Esteves, 1989).
9. Possible etymology and comments on Curaçao toponyms
Adicoura - According to Van Grol, this is the original name of the island Klein 
 Curaçao. The name Nicula is also found in historical records. In Paraguaná 
 we find the village Adicoura.
Cariatávo, Cariatabo, Careotabo - the name of a cove or small lagoon east of 
 the Schottegat (Hartog, 1968). cari means ‘coast’, ‘shore’ (Cruz Esteves, 
 1989) abo means ‘place’, tabo ‘the branching of a tree or river’, ‘where one 
 river meets another’. Cariatávo was probably a small lagoon at the end of 
 the Rooi Koraal Specht, cq. where this rooi meets the shore. Nowadays this 
 is the site of the Breezes Hotel. 
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 43 9/8/2014 5:11:53 PM
44
Curaçao, Curazao - Curaçao is definitely not from Portuguese. Both Las Casas 
 and Oviedo mention it very early and although their works were published 
 somewhat later, their information goes back to the early sixteenth century. 
 Las Casas (1552) states:“…y aquella debía ser la que llaman los indios 
 Curaçao, la penúltima lengua…” [and this must be the island which the 
 Indians call Curaçao, the before last syllable long]. Oviedo (1535) states: 
 “ …más al poniente de las islas de las Aves está la isla Bonaire; más al 
 poniente de la isla Bonaire está otra que se llama de Corazante, más al 
 poniente de Corazante está la isla llamada Aruba .… a lo que la carta llama 
 Corazante, llaman los indios Curazao” [more to the west of the Aves islands 
 lies the island of Bonaire; more to the west of the island of Bonaire there 
 is another one called Corazante, more to the west of Corazante lies an island 
 called Aruba….The island indicated as Corazante on the map, the Indians 
 call Curazao]. Federmann (1530) also uses the name Curazao (see 
 Martinez, 1971). The “Relación de Antonio Barbudo” which probably 
 dates from 1570 mentions the Indios de Curaçao (see above). All these 
 reports date back to a time when there was no Portuguese influence 
 in Curaçao. The Spanish and Portuguese crowns had not yet been united 
 under Felipe II of Spain (Felipe I of Portugal) and even then the overseas 
 dependencies were kept under separate rule. Portuguese influence in 
 Curaçao only started after 1634 with the Dutch occupation of the island 
 and use of the island as a slave depot. After the Dutch in Brazil were 
 defeated, some Dutch and Portuguese Jews migrated to Curaçao. The first 
 Portuguese Jews arrived in 1652. If the word Curaçao were Portuguese this 
 would be very exceptional. The word Antilles is of Portuguese origin (ante-
 ilhas). The names of Brasil, Madeira and Açores are Portuguese as well, but 
 they are within the Portuguese realm. Even in Surinam where early 
 Portuguese influence on Sranan Tongo is in evidence, we do not find 
 Portuguese toponyms. Thus Curaçao or Curazao is of Caquetío origin, but 
 we do not know how the form Kòrsou (Corsow) which is used in 
 Papiamentu came into being.
10. Possible etymology and comments on Bonaire toponyms
Amboïna, Ambuana (pronounce Ambwana) - In the Dominican Republic this
 name is also found. Amboïna, Amboína is associated with caves or a well. 
 The name Yuanaboína is also found (Tejera, 1977). In Bonaire there is a well 
 at Amboïna, Ambuana.
Buynari, Buinare - Nicolaas Federmann passed Bonaire in early 1530, in 
 an account of his voyage which was published in Hagenau in 1557, he 
 gives Buynari as the name of the island (Martinez, 1971). In some other 
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 44 9/8/2014 5:11:53 PM
45
 early sources the name Buinare is found.
Onima - a cave on the North coast of Bonaire, it is also the name of a nearby 
 cove (Boca Onima). Taïno ní is ‘water’, Lokono oni means ‘rain’, oníabo 
 means ‘water’ (Taylor, 1977). Caquetío ima, nima means ‘wet’, ‘humid’ 
 (Cruz Esteves, 1989).
Yatu Bacu - In Venezuela the suffix –baca is found in place names. 
 Dauguaraubaca is a place along the Río Amacuro, in Eastern Venezuela 
 near the Guyana border, in an area where Lokono Indians live. Dauguarau is 
 a species of mangrove (Conocarpus erecta) – baca means ‘a group’, ‘a 
 thicket’ (Alvarado, 1921). Yatu Bacu is probably related to Lokono – baca. 
 In this location there are dense thickets of yatu cactus.
11. Words with less certain links to Caquetío
There is also a group of words of uncertain etymology. Some of these must 
surely be of Caquetío origin, but a different origin cannot be excluded. 
Examples are: 
bara-tai (B) - a bush or small tree (Samyda dodecandra) 
batuti (B) - a vine (Doyerea emetocathartica)
brakuha (B) - a grass (Sporobolus virginicus)
bushurumu, bushurumbu (B) - a bush (Lantana involucrata)
chananá (C) - a creeping vine (Evolvulus convolvuloides) 
chanchan (A, B, C) - buttocks 
chokuèkuè, chokwèkwè, chokèkwè, chokèkè (C, B) - a seabird, Audubon’s 
 shearwater (Puffinus lherminieri)
cocoí (C) - a quail (Colinus cristatus) 
dakawa (B) - a small tree (Maytenus tetragona) 
dalakochi (C,B), tiracochi, dalacochi (A) - a cricket
djaka (B, C), djaca (A) - a rat 
djakarou, yakarou, rakiou (C) - edible Nerita sea snails 
foño, funfun (B) - a cactus (Pilocereus lanuginosus)
guengu - a small crab, the “Sally lightfoot” (Grapsus grapsus)
huliba (A), oliba (B) - a tree (Capparis indica) 
kahela (B) - the laughing gull (Larus atricilla)
karawau - a fish (Periplus paru) 
kinikini - kestrel (Falco sparverius) 
kokolodé (B, C), cocolode (A) - an herb (Heliotropum angiospermum) 
makuaku (C, B) - the frigate bird or man o’ war bird (Fregata magnifiscens)
nebuha (A) - a plant with a large tuber (Cerathosanthes palmata)
olitu - the yellowmouth grouper (Mycteroperca interstitialis)
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 45 9/8/2014 5:11:53 PM
46
purunchi (A,C,B) - the name for two groupers, the grasby and the coney. The 
 purunchi or purunchi kabritu (Cephalopholis cruentata) and the purunchi, 
 purunchi pretu, or purunchi barika blanku (Epinephelus fulvus) in Bonaire it 
 also has the name rei di punchi. Pinart (1890) mentions the name purantsi 
 on a list of Indian words from Aruba, but this list contains several words 
 which are definitely not Indian (see van Buurt and Joubert, 1997.)
serashi - a small tree, (Trichilia trifolia)
tata (A, B, C) - father 
teku (C), teco (A) - a bromelia (Bromelia humilis) 
totèki - (C,B) Anolis lizard
uruzján, urizján, ulizján (B) - part of a pond or water catchment area with a 
 treacherous sucking, sticking muddy bottom, also used to indicate a water 
 hole where water is welling up. 
warero, wareru (A) - a vine, (Cissus verticilata)
12. Acknowledgements
The listing of words in this article is based to a large extent on the book 
Stemmen uit het Verleden, which I published with my cousin Sidney M. 
Joubert, in Dutch in 1997. Among the many people who cooperated in the 
publication of this book, mention has to be made of the late Antoine J. Maduro. 
I also wish to thank Carel P. de Haseth for many suggestions. Stemmen uit het 
Verleden did not explicitly state which Amerindian words in the Papiamentu 
language are likely to be original Caquetío words and which ones are likely to 
have been imported via Spanish, Taïno or Guajiro. Since this is to some extent 
a subjective judgment, it was felt that it would be best to present the available 
evidence and let readers draw their own conclusions. This has turned out to 
be a major mistake, leaving room for totally erroneous interpretations. In this 
publication there are a few additions not found in the original list. I wish to 
thank Byron Boekhoudt in Aruba for the names of scorpion fishes in Aruba 
and information on the warashi and Julio Beaujon for information on the 
teishi. Ramon Todd Dandaré provided additional information for Aruba and its 
spelling and Chila de Haseth – Bolivar has proofread the manuscript. Fayona 
Flanegien provided the addition of the toponym Suduri in Aruba. Fred M. 
Chumaceiro made the maps for this version of the article.
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 46 9/8/2014 5:11:53 PM
47
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 47 9/8/2014 5:11:53 PM
48
Caquetío Indians on Curaçao during colonial times and Caquetío words in the Papiamentu language 
P1 Bushi
(Melocactus macracanthos)
P2 Dabaruida (A) 
(Pithecellobium unguis-cati)
P3 Dividivi
(Caesalpinia coriaria)
P4 Dori maco
(Pleurodema brachyops)
P5 Fofoti
(Laguncularia racemosa)
Caque
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 48 9/8/2014 5:11:58 PM
49
guage 
P6 Gogorobí
(Photo Docco Engels)
Caquetío Indians on Curaçao during colonial times and Caquetío words in the Papiamentu language 
P7 Hobada
(Acacia tortuosa)
P8 Hudishibana 
(Photo Jan Beaujon)
P9 Ishiri 
(Crateva tapia)
P10 Kadushi pushi 
(Pilosocereus lanuginosus)
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 49 9/8/2014 5:12:04 PM
50
Caquetío Indians on Curaçao during colonial times and Caquetío words in the Papiamentu language 
P11 Kamari 
(Coccoloba swartzii)
P12 Karawara 
(Cordia dentata) (Photo Carel P. de Haseth) 
P14 Kasha Kutu 
(Mycteroperca tigris) (Photo John Dohmen)
P13 Karkidaki (B) Catashi (A)
(Phyllantus botryanthus)
P15 Kododo 
(Cnemidophorus arubensis)
Caque
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 50 9/8/2014 5:12:07 PM
51
guage 
aseth) 
P16 Kokorobana 
(Mallotonia gnaphalodes)
Caquetío Indians on Curaçao during colonial times and Caquetío words in the Papiamentu language 
P17 Mahawa in shallow water 
(Paranthias furcifer) (Photo Mark Vermeij)
P18 Makurá 
(Abrus precatorius)
P19 Marihuri-Manihuri 
(Manihot carthagenensis)
P20 Patalewa (B) 
(Pandion haliaetus)
P21 Shimaruku 
(Malpighia emarginata)
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 51 9/8/2014 5:12:12 PM
Caquetío Indians on Curaçao during colonial times and Caquetío words in the Papiamentu language 
P22 Shoshori, Shoshoro 
(Passiflora foetida) 1
P23 Shoshori, Shoshoro 
(Passiflora foetida) 2
P24 Tampañá P25 Tarabara (A) 
(Mimosa distachya)
P26 Wakurá 
(Randia aculeata)
P27 Waltaca (Aruba) 
(Anolis lineatus) 
(A
Caque
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 52 9/8/2014 5:12:17 PM
53
guage 
P28 Warashi 
(Albula vulpes) (Photo Mark Vermeij) 
P30 Watapana 
(Caesalpinia coriaria)
P29 Watakeli 
(Bourreria succulenta)
P32 Yuana
(Iguana iguana) (Photo M. da Costa Gomez)
Caquetío Indians on Curaçao during colonial times and Caquetío words in the Papiamentu language 
P31 Wayaká 
(Guaiacum officinale)
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 53 9/8/2014 5:12:21 PM
54 54
-----
Some names of Animals and Plants in Papiamentu language 
P33 Bachi pretu, Barika hel 
(Coereba flaveola)
P34 Bichi di dos kabes 
(Liotyphlops albirostris)
P35 Bichi di kandela 
(Photo Carel de Haseth)
P36 Blousana 
(Cnemidophorus murinus) male
P38 Bringamosa 
(Jatropha urens)
P37 Blenchi dòrnasol 
(Photo Carel de Haseth)
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 54 9/8/2014 5:12:26 PM
54 55
-----
P39 Bringamosa 
(Jatropha urens)
P40 Chokuèkuè, Chokèkè
(Puffinus lherminieri) (Photo Kai Wulf) 
P41 Deklá 
(Phalacrocorax brasilianus)
P43 Grastèlchi di piedra 
(Photo Mark Vermeij)
Some names of Animals and Plants in Papiamentu language 
P42 Djuku
(Mucuna sloanei)
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 55 9/8/2014 5:12:31 PM
56
P45 Kahela 
(Larus atricilla)
P47 Kapoti as 
(Nezara viridula)
P46 Kaktus sürnam 
(Euphorbia lactea)
Some names of Animals and Plants in Papiamentu language 
P44 Guengu 
(Grapsus grapsus) (Photo Carel de Haseth)
P48 Kenepa spiritu or Guyaba baster 
(Casearia tremula)
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 56 9/8/2014 5:12:36 PM
57
P51 Kokolishi di kalakuna 
(Cerion uva)
P49 Kipópó 
(Coprinus comatus)
P52 Lolo di awa 
(Holothuria mexicana)
P50 Koffie ku lechi (A)
(Ameiva bifrontata)
Some names of Animals and Plants in Papiamentu language 
P53 Makamba 
(Himantopus mexicanus)
Opmaak boek definitief 8 september 2014.indd 57 9/8/2014 5:12:40 PM
58
Some names of Animals and Plants in Papiamentu language 
P58 Mata piská 
(Jaquinia armillaris)
P56 Maribomba 
(Polistes) (Photo Carel de Haseth)
P55 Makamba marine